Any  discussion of this  paper  will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to  be published in  the  December 1969 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  K. Aramaki and N. Hackerman, This  Journal, 115, 1007 (1968).
2.  N.  Hackerman, R.  M.  Hurd, and R.  R.  Annand, Corrosion, 18,  37t  (1962).
3.  N.  Hackerman and R. M.  Hurd,  "First International Congress  on Metallic Corrosion," p. 166,  Butterworths, London (1962).
4.  R.  R.  Annand, R. M.  Hurd, and N.  Hackerman, This  Journal, 112,  134, 144 (1965).
5.  G. W.  Poling, ibid., 114,  1209 (1967).
6.  N. Hackerman, E. S.  Snavely, Jr., and J.  S.  Payne, Jr., ibid., 113, 677  (1966).
7.  A.  W. Ralston,  D.  N.  Eggenberger,  and  P.  L. DuBrow, J.  Am. Chem. Soc., 76,  977 (1948).
9.  J.  D. Dunitz  and V. Prelog, Angew.  Chem., 72, 896 (1960).
8.  J.  F.  B u n n e t t   and T.  K. Brotherton, J. Org. Chem., 22, 832 (1957).
10. I0. F. Fichter  and E. Rothenberg, Helv. chim. Acta, 5,  166  (1922).
- II. Z. A. Iofa, V.  V.  Batrakov,  and  Cho-Ngok-Ba, Electrochim. Acta, 9,  1645  (1964).
12.  B.  E.  Conway  and  R. G. Barradas, "Transactions of the Symposium  on Electrode Processes," p.  299, John  Wiley &amp;  Sons,  New  York (1961).
13.  T.  Murakawa,  S.  Nagaura, and  N.  Hackerman, Corrosion  Sci., 7,  79 (1967).
14.  T.  Murakawa, T.  Kato,  S.  Nagaura,  and N. Hackerman, ibid., 7, 657  (1967).
15.  N.  Hackerman, Corrosion, 18,  332t  (1962).
16. 1.~. K.  Komiyama,  K.  Kudo,  and N.  Sato, Corrosion Engineering, 16, 208  (1967).
17.  R.  M.  Silverstein, G.  C.  Bassler,  "Spectrometric Identification of Organic  Compounds,"  p. 163, John  Wiley  &amp; Sons,  New  York (1967).
18.  E. A. Brause, Ann. Repts.  Progress  Chem., 42, 105 (1945).
19.  R.  M.  Silverstein and G. C. Bassler, "Spectrometric Identification of  Organic  Compounds,"  p.  96,  John Wiley  &amp; Sons,  New  York (1967).
20.  P. L. Corio and B. P. Dailey, J. Am.  Chem.  Soc., 78, 3043  (1956).
21.  F.  M.  Donahue,  A. Akiyama,  and  K. Nobe, This Journal, 114, 1006  (1967).
22.  L. H. Little, "Infrared  Spectra of Adsorbed Species," p.  i00, Academic Press, London (1966).

## Anodic  Polarization of Some Ferritic  Stainless  Steels in Chloride  Media

## E.  A. Lizlovs*  and  A. P.  Bond*

Research  Laboratory, Climax  Molybdenum Company  of  Michigan, Ann Arbor,  Michigan

## ABSTRACT

Potentiodynamic polarization experiments were performed  in  0.1N hydrochloric acid  with 17%  chromium ferritic stainless steels containing up to 3% molybdenum  and with 18% Cr-2%  Mo ferritie stainless steels  containing 0-2%  nickel  and 0-2%  titanium. Potentiodynamic polarization studies with the 17%  chromium alloys were also  performed  in 1N  hydrochloric acid  and in  IN  sulfuric acid  -l-  0.1N sodium chloride media.  The critical current densities were significantly decreased  with an increased  molybdenum  content. The  pitting potentials were increased  with increased  molybdenum  and titanium  contents, whereas nickel  additions had  no  effect. All materials were sensitive to  crevice corrosion. Sulfate ions  in  the  SO4=:  Cl-  molar  ratio of  5:1 inhibited pitting corrosion and suppressed  crevice corrosion.

The  effects of molybdenum  on anodic polarization of  17%  chromium stainless steels in  sulfuric acid  have previously been studied  in this  Laboratory  (1).  Because of the well-established usage of molybdenum alloying for  increasing the  resistance of  stainless steel to pitting corrosion, interest developed  in extending anodic  polarization studies to chloride media. It  was envisioned that  the  anodic  polarization in  acidic chloride  media would not only  provide  information concerning the  effect of  molybdenum additions on the  pitting  potential of ferritic stainless steels, but would also  provide  some information concerning the activepassive  transition of stainless steels in the presence of  chlorides.

## Experimental  Procedures

Two  sets  of laboratory-prepared ferritic alloys  and two commercial  ferritic stainless steels (Types  430 and 4341) were investigated. The  high-purity 17% chromium, 17%  Cr-l% Mo, and 17%  Cr-3%  Mo  laboratory alloys were prepared  by melting  and casting in  vacuum. The resulting ingots were hot-rolled to  0.64-cmthick  sheet, which  was  cold-rolled to  a 0.32-cm  thickness, annealed for  1  hr at  815~ and water-quenched. The  18%  Cr-2%  Mo  alloys modified  by titanium and

*  Electrochemical Society  Active  Member.

1Type  434 is the proposed designation for stainless steel  conraining 17%  chromium and 1%  molybdenum.

nickel  additions were produced by induction melting in an argon  atmosphere, using  the  split-heat technique. In  this technique, the  base  composition is  melted,  and part  of  the  melt  is poured  off  to  produce  an  ingot; then to  the  balance  of  the  melt,  the required  alloying additions are made and the  next  ingot is  cast. This  process  is  repeated  until a series of the  desired  compositions  is  cast.  The  18% Cr-2%  Mo ingots  were  hotforged,  hot-rolled to 0.76-cm-thick strips, and coldrolled to  0.38-cm-thick strips. The 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  alloys  containing titanium were annealed  for 1 hr at 104O~ the  minimum  temperature that  prevented formation  of a second  phase in  the  high titanium alloy, and then  water-quenched. The rest  of  the  18%  Cr-2% Mo  materials and the  hot-rolled, commercial  Types  430 and 434 steels were annealed  at 815~ for 1 hr and water-quenched. The chemical  compositions of  all  the materials are  given  in Table  I.

The electrodes for  the  potentiodynamic studies were mounted in acrylic plastic, the exposed surface  (0.5 by 0.6  cm)  always  being  a longitudinal section parallel to the  rolled  surface. A  more  detailed description of the  electrode can be  found  elsewhere  (1). The exposed surface  was  polished  using standard  metallographic techniques, ending with a  distilled water slurry  of 0.3~  alumina.  For the  pitting potential measurements, the electrode surface  was  masked with electroplaters

Table I.  Compositions  of alloys studied

|                                                                                                    |                                                                  |                                           |                                                |                                                   | Chemical composition, %           | Chemical composition, %                 | Chemical composition, %                    |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Alloy                                                                                              | C                                                                | Cr                                        | Mo                                             | Ni                                                | Ti                                | Mn                                      | Cu                                         | Si                                           | P                                               | S                                      | N                                              |
| Type 430 Type 434 High-purity 17% mium alloys 18% Cr-2% Mo series 18% Cr-2% Mo series 18% Cr-2% Mo | 0.046 0.069 0.003 0.002 0.003 NA a NA 0.031 0.034 0.035 0.032 NA | 16.30 16.52 16.93 16.68 NA NA NA 18.70 NA | 0"~9 0.03 1.04 2.99 NA NA 1.95 1.97 NA 1.97 NA | 0.33 0.30 -- -- 0.-~I 0,62 1,08 0,11 NA 0.57 2.08 | -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1.86 1.75 | 0.70 0.42 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- | 0.10 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 -- -- -- -- -- -- | 0.60 0.54 0.06 0.05 0.06 NA NA NA 0.13 NA NA | 0.018 0.016 0.009 0.007 0.007 -- -- -- -- -- -- | 0.008 0.007 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- | -- -- 0.0065 -- 0.0048 NA NA NA 0.045 0.023 -- |
| titanium series                                                                                    |                                                                  | 18.53 18.45                               |                                                |                                                   |                                   |                                         |                                            |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
| chro-                                                                                              |                                                                  | 17.08                                     |                                                |                                                   |                                   |                                         |                                            |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
| nickel                                                                                             |                                                                  |                                           |                                                |                                                   |                                   |                                         |                                            |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
| titanium                                                                                           |                                                                  |                                           |                                                |                                                   | 0.47                              |                                         |                                            |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
| nickel-                                                                                            |                                                                  |                                           |                                                |                                                   | 0.91                              |                                         |                                            |                                              |                                                 |                                        |                                                |
|                                                                                                    |                                                                  |                                           |                                                |                                                   |                                   |                                         | --                                         | NA                                           | --                                              | --                                     | --                                             |

series.

tape (Scotch  470),  except  for  a circular area  0.36  cm in  diameter.

The potentiodynamic polarization experiments were performed  using  standard  equipment  and techniques. Potentials were measured with respect to a saturated calomel electrode. The  auxiliary platinum  electrode was isolated from the  test solution by a glass  frit. All materials  were tested in argon-saturated 0.1N hydrochloric acid (HC1). The high-purity alloys  and commercial  steels were tested  in argon-saturated 1N  HC1, IN sulfuric acid  (H2SO4),  and 1N H2SO4  W  0.1N  sodium chloride  (NaC1). Potential scanning  rates  for most polarization experiments were 600 mv/hr for  the  18% Cr-2%  Mo  series, and 540 mv/hr for  the rest  of the materials. For determination of the  pitting potentials, the  electrode potential was scanned  at  the  rate  of  600 or 540 mv/hr up to potentials of about 0.1-0.2v less noble than the expected pitting  potential. At  this potential the  scanning rate  was decreased  tenfold, i.e., to 60 or 54 mv/hr.  Scanning  was continued until the pitting potential was reached. The onset  of  pitting was marked by a sharp  and sudden  increase in  polarization current. The  potential scanning  was  stopped  at the pitting potential, and the  electrode was  allowed to  pit for  20 to  30 min.  It  was then  removed from the  solution, the  tape  was stripped, and its  surface was examined for pitting  and possible crevice  corrosion. The potential scanning  was  usually  started  at--0.7  to --0.6v, with  respect to  the  saturated calomel  electrode (SCE); the  scanning was always into  the  passive  potential region. In some  experiments, the potential of an actively corroding  electrode was  changed almost instantaneously to a  selected potential in a  passive range  by  switching on a potentiostat, with a potential preset at  a desired  value.

The experiments with the 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  series of alloys  were  performed at 24 ~ \_\_  I~ All the other materials were tested  at  29.6 ~ \_  0.1~

## Results

Experiments  in  0.1N  hydrochloric acid.--Typical anodic  polarization curves  for  the  Types 430 and 434 stainless  teels in  0.1N HC1  are shown in  Fig.  1.  The active region  for  the  Type 430 steel exhibited two current maxima,  one peak at --0.50v  and  another  at --0.38v. Considerable variations in peak heights  were observed  for  different Type 430 samples,  and in  some samples  the second peak was  higher  than the first peak.  However, the  corresponding potentials remained approximately  within  \_ 10 mv  of the values  given above. 2 The  single critical current density peak,  shown by the  Type 434 steel, was always  lower  than  the  corresponding peak  for  the  Type 430 steel.

The passive region  for  the  Types 430 and 434 stainless  steels terminated  at potentials considerably less noble  than the normal transpassive transition range, +0.85 to +0.95v.  This passivity breakdown for the unmasked electrodes was  characterized by a gradual increase in polarization current. A considerable amount of polarization current  could  usually  be sustained at selected potentials without  visible pitting or general corrosion. However, after a long  potentiostatic polarization  time,  microscopic  examinations revealed  some corrosion at the boundary  of the sample and at the acrylic mount. This observation was  in accord with the  results obtained by Schwenk  (2). Thus,  in  all the potentiodynamic  polarization experiments with unmasked  electrodes  in HC1,  the apparent passivity breakdown was not due to pitting corrosion, but  was a  result of the passivity breakdown inside  the  extremely  fine  crevice between  the  electrode and plastic mount. The  presence  of crevices  with the electrode mounted in metallographic materials was  also indicated  by Greene et  al. (3).

The differences in  polarization behavior  between an unmasked and a masked electrode in  the  passive state are  illustrated in  Fig.  1.  For  the  masked electrode the current  density  beyond the primary  passivation potential gradually decreased  to  the  level of 10  -6 amp/ cm  2 or lower,  depending  on  the potential scanning rate, and remained  at  this  level until either pitting or a normal transpassive breakdown occurred. The current  density for unmasked  electrodes, however, first decreased  and then  increased gradually, indicative of the  onset  of  crevice corrosion.

Typical  anodic polarization curves for the highpurity 17%  chromium alloys in  0.1N HC1  are  shown in Fig. 2. As  the molybdenum  content  increased, the critical current density decreased. The primary  passivation  potential,  however, tended to become  more noble  at  higher  molybdenum  content. A  second peak in the active-passive transition region  was  observed only for the 17% Cr-3%  Mo alloy.  Critical current density for  the 17%  chromium alloy  varied  from 1 to 6  ma/cm  2 for different samples.  These variations in critical current density were accompanied  by changes in primary  passivation potential between --0.49  and

<!-- image -->

potential correFig. 1. Anodic  potentiodynamic  polarization  curves for  unmasked Types  430  and 434 electrodes and  for  masked Type 430  electrode in  0.1N hydrochloric  acid  at  29.6~

I

Fig. 2. Anodic potentiodynamic  polarization curves for  17% chromium, 17% Cr-1% Mo,  and  17% Cr-3% Mo alloys  in  0.1N hydrochloric  acid at 29.6~ (unmasked electrodes).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Anodic potentiodynamic polarization curves for the 18% Cr-2% Mo-0.11% Ni and 18% Cr-2% Mo-1.86% Ti-0.11% Ni alloys (masked electrodes) in 0.1N hydrochloric  acid  at 24~

<!-- image -->

-0.43v; i~  general, the  more noble  the  primary  passivation  potential, the higher  the critical current  density. The  passive region  for  the unmasked electrodes again  terminated at  potentials less  noble  than  pitting potentials. However, crevice  corrosion did not influence the critical current  density of the materials, so that  unmasked electrodes could be used  for  the  anodic polarization studies in the active region. Furthermore, the  minimum  current densities, reached  in  the passive region with unmasked  electrodes, appeared to depend on the  molybdenum content for  both  commercial and high-purity alloys. The  steels with the highest molybdenum  content  had the lowest  current  minima in the passive state  (Fig. 1 and 2).  Thus,  molybdenum appears  to improve  the  resistance of ferritic stainless

Table III. Current density maxima  and corresponding potentials in argon-saturated  0.1N hydrochloric  acid  for  18%  Cr-2%  Mo ferritic  stainless steels

secondary  current

| Alloy addition to 18% Or-2% Mo base, % Ti Ni   | Alloy addition to 18% Or-2% Mo base, % Ti Ni   | Critical current density, ma/cm~   | Primary passivation potential vs. SCE, v   | Secondary current density maximum, ma/cm2   | Potentialcorre- sponding to the secondary density maxima vs.SCE, v   |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| -- -- -- 0.47 1.86 0.91 1.75                   | 0.11 0.62 1.08 0.11 ~0.I 0.57 2.08             | 0.11 -- -- 0.10 -- 0.002 -         | --0.475 -- -- --0.480 -0:~5 -              | 0.014 0.04 0.018 0.006 0.002 0.005          | --0.350 --0.340 --0.380 --0.350 ~30 -o.300                           |

Table  IV.  Average pitting  potentials in 0.iN hydrochloric  acid

| Alloy                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Average pitting potential, vs. SCE, v                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Type 430 Type 434 17% Chromium 17% Cr-l% Mo 17% Cr-3% Mo 18% Cr-2% Mo-0.11% Ni 18% Cr-2% Mo-0.62% Hi 18% Cr-2% Mo-l.08% Hi 18% Or-2% Mo-0.47% Ti 18% Cr-2% M0-1.86% Ti 18% Cr-2% Mo-0.91% Ti-0.57% Ni | 0.18 0.19 0.26 0.32 >0.80 0.31 0.35 0.34 >0.8 0.63 >0.8 |

steels to  crevice corrosion in chloride media.  However, since  the  crevice geometry  was not  intentionally controlled on the electrodes, further  experimental work is  needed to obtain more quantitative information concerning  the effect  of alloying additions  on  crevice corrosion. Representative values  of  critical parameters for  the commercial  steels and high-purity alloys  are summarized  in  Table  II.

Representative anodic  polarization diagrams  in  0.1N HC1  for 18%  Or-2%  Mo  alloys are shown  in Fig.  3. Table  III gives  the  critical parameters for  these  alloys. Table  III also  shows that  an  increase in nickel content, from 0.11%  to 0.62%, results  in complete  suppression of the  active region. Although  the addition of 0.47% titanium had no effect on critical behavior, an increase in  titanium level to 1.86%  resulted in  a complete  disappearance  of the active  region.  In  addition to the normal critical current  density  peaks, considerably lower  secondary  peaks  were observed  for  most of  the 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  alloys in  the --0.38 to--0.30v region.

Average  pitting potentials for  all the materials are summarized in Table IV. A  typical polarization run with  a masked electrode, exhibiting termination of the passive range  due to  onset  of  pitting, is  shown in  Fig. 4.  The onset  of pitting corrosion was  always marked by a sharp  current rise over  several orders  of  magnitude,  but  crevice  corrosion was marked by a gradual current  increase. Under the experimental conditions used,  the  materials  that could  be scanned  beyond the threshold of  transpassivity (+0.80v)  ought  to  be considered  resistant to pitting corrosion. However,  exploratory  studies  showed  that potentiostatic pitting could  be  achieved with  materials that  exhibit a full

Table I1. Current density maxima and  corresponding potentials in argon-saturated hydrochloric acid for commercial ferritic  stainless steels and  high-purity  17%  chromium alloys

passiva-

|                                                    | 0.1N Hydrochloric acid           | 0.1N Hydrochloric acid                     | 0.1N Hydrochloric acid                     | 0.1N Hydrochloric acid                                        | 1.0N Hydrochloric acid           | 1.0N Hydrochloric acid                       |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Alloy                                              | Critical current density,ma/cm e | Primary passiva- tion potential vs. SCE, v | Secondary current density maximum, ma/cm 2 | Potentialcorre- sponding to secondary current density maximum | Critical current density,ma/cm 2 | Primary passiva- tion potential vs. SCE, v   |
| Type 430 Type 434 17% Chromium 17% Cr-l% 17% Cr-3% | 1.2                              | --0.502 --0.490 --0.495 --0.500 --0.463    | 0.77 -- --                                 | --0.380 -- -- -- --0.368                                      | __a 18a 140 a 46 13              | __ --0.310to --0.305 --0.230 --0.310 --0.340 |
|                                                    | 0.26                             |                                            |                                            |                                                               |                                  |                                              |
|                                                    | 0.95                             |                                            |                                            |                                                               |                                  |                                              |
| Mo                                                 | 0.48                             |                                            |                                            |                                                               |                                  |                                              |
| Mo                                                 | 0.058                            |                                            | 0.018                                      |                                                               |                                  |                                              |

Fig. 4. knodic potentiodynamic  polarization  curve for masked 17% Cr-1% Mo electrode in  0.1N  hydrochloric  acid at 29.6~

<!-- image -->

passive  range  under  potentiodynamic conditions. This occurred under  conditions of  nearly  instantaneous potential switch  from an active corrosion potential to a sufficiently noble  passive potential. Thus,  the  17%  Cr3%  Mo  alloy was  pitted at +0.40v under  these  conditions.

A repassivation phenomenon  was  also observed during  several  potentiodynamic pitting experiments. This phenomenon  was  usually  indicated by  current blips at  potentials that  were lower  than  those  at  which continuous  pitting occurred (Fig.  4). However,  the pitting corrosion was sometimes  sustained for  15 to  20 min, and then  followed  by complete  repassivation of the  pits. Examination  of  the  electrode revealed visible pits  inside the free  electrode area,  but revealed  no evidence  of  corrosion under  the  masking tape.

Experiments in  I.ON  hydrochloric  acid.--Anodic polarization curves  for  the  commercial  and  high-purity alloys  in 1.0N HC1 are shown  in  Fig.  5 and 6  (unmasked electrodes). Table  II  gives  the  critical current densities and primary  passivation potentials. Type 430 stainless steel  did not passivate at all  in 1.0N  HC1. Type 434 steel did exhibit a current peak at  the  expected  position for  the  primary  passivation potential,

Fig. 5. Anadic potentiodyaamic polarization  curves for Types 430  and  434  stainless  steels  in 1N hydrochloric acid  at 29.6~ (unmasked electrodes).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Anodic potentiodynamic polarization  curves for  17% chromium, 17% Cr-1% Mo,  and 17% Cr-3% Mo alloys  in  1N hydrochloric acid  at  29.6~ (unmasked electrodes).

<!-- image -->

--0.310v; however,  current densities beyond the critical peak  remained quite  high. All the high-purity alloys  exhibited a critical current  density  peak, but the current  densities at potentials approximately  100 mv more noble  than  the  primary  passivation potentials were several orders  of  magnitude  higher than  the  corresponding  current  densities in 1N  H2SO4 (1).  The potentiostatic passivation experiments, performed in 1N  HC1  with  masked  electrodes, showed than  17%  Cr1%  Mo  and 17%  Cr-3% Mo  alloys could be completely passivated in  the--0.20 to  --0.10v region. The resulting  polarization current  densities in  the passive  state were of the  same  order of magnitude as those observed  in H2SO4, 10  -6 amp/cm  2  (1).  Thus, the apparent  high-current densities obtained with unmasked electrodes are  an outcome of crevice corrosion, which is  much  more  severe  in 1.0N than  in  0.1N HC1.

At  any passive  potential under potentiostatic conditions, the polarization current  densities for the masked 17%  chromium alloy and for commercial  Types 430  and 434 steel were several  orders  of magnitude above the 10  -8 amp/cm  2 level. Furthermore, the potentiostatic experiments with an unmasked 17%  chromium  electrode at  --0.15v showed that  at  this  potential, the electrode corroded  uniformly  at a rate  corresponding  to approximately  10  ma/cm  2. Thus, for the straight chromium steels and for  Type 434 steel, the  high current densities in  a passive range  are  primarily the result of  the  uniform  corrosion, but  for  the 17%  Cr-l% Mo  and 17%  Cr-3%  Mo  alloys, the  relatively high current in  the  passive range  is  largely the result of  crevice corrosion.

The elimination of  the  crevice by the  use of  masking  tape was  considerably more  difficult in 1N  than in  0.1N HC1;  in  fact, many  experiments were invalid because  the  mask  loosened, and crevice corrosion resulted. Therefore,  neither  the  potentiostatic maintenance  of  the  passivity over  prolonged  periods of  time, nor the potential range  over which the steels would retain their passivity was investigated.

The critical current  density for  all materials again decreased  with the increase in molybdenum  content, and at  the  same time  the  primary  passivation potentials became more  negative. The  relationship among molybdenum  content,  critical current  density,  and primary  passivation potential is  shown in  Fig. 7.

Potentiodynamic studies  in sulfuric acid -Isodium chloride  solution.--Typical potentiodynamic polarization  curves  for  ferritic stainless steels in  the  1N H2SO~ medium and the  1N  H2SO4 -t-  0.1N  NaC1 medium  are given  in  Fig.  8,  which shows that  the  critical current density is increased by the  addition of  the  chloride ion

V-

Fig. 7.  Effect  of  molybdenum additions to  the 17% chromium alloy  on the critical  current density and primary passivation potential  in  1N  hydrochloric  acid at  29.6~

<!-- image -->

I

<!-- image -->

POTENTIAL

(V) VERSUS

SCE

Fig. 8. Potentiodynamic polarization curves for Type 430  stainless  steel in IN  sulfuric acid  and in  IN  sulfuric acid -~- O.IN sodium chloride  at  29.6~ (unmasked  electrodes).

with the vacuum-melted  laboratory alloys. Furthermore, the average  pitting potential for  the Type 434 steel is  only  slightly  higher than  the  pitting potential for  the Type  430 steel. The difference in pitting potential was much more in the 17%  chromium and 17% Cr-l% Mo  alloys. Since  the  carbon  level for  the  Type 434 sample  used  in this  investigation was considerably higher  than  that  for  the  Type  430 sample [i.e., 0.069 as compared with 0.046%  (Table  I)], it  may  be concluded  that the  higher  carbon level obscured the  effect of molybdenum  on  pitting potential. Higher carbon content  in a ferritic matrix  will  result in  more precipitated chromium and molybdenum carbides and in a  depletion of the matrix  of chromium  and molybdenum. Consequently, the ferritic steels with higher carbon contents will  probably  have a  greater  sensitivity to  pitting corrosion.

I The  examination  of the pitting potentials for the 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  ferritic alloys, with a carbon  content of about 0.03%, leads to the conclusion that small nickel  additions (up to 1%)  do not affect the  pitting potentials of these  alloys. In contrast to the insensitivity to small  additions of nickel, small  additions of titanium have a very  pronounced  effect on pitting potentials. Titanium  contents  of 0.47 and 0.91%  raised the  pitting potential above the  transpassive transition. A  further increase in  titanium to  about  1.8%  reduced pitting potential. Pitting potentials for  titanium-modified  alloys, however, are still more  noble than for titanium-free alloys. This effect of titanium could  be indirect. The titanium ties up carbon and nitrogen, preventing the  formation  of  chromium and molybdenum carbides and nitrides and,  consequently, prevents  the formation of zones  depleted in  chromium and molybdenum. With larger  titanium additions, the considerable  amount of second phase that  develops  might be the  preferred site for  pitting attack.

The pitting potential for  the  18%  Cr-2%  Mo-0.03% C alloy was about  the  same as  that for  the  high-purity 17%  Cr-1%  Mo-0.002%  C  alloy, and was  significantly more noble  than  that  for  either Type 430 steel or the high-purity 17%  chromium  alloy. Thus, in  the  17% chromium  steels with commercial carbon levels, the increase of molybdenum content  to 2% should  result in considerably improved resistance to pitting corrosion.

to sulfuric acid;  however,  this  increase is  caused by the shift  of the primary passivation potential in a noble direction due  to the activation effect  of the chloride ions. At a given  potential up to the  primary passivation potential for pure acid,  the dissolution rates  of Type  430  stainless  teel  were  lower in the chloride-containing acid than in pure acid.  This inhibiting effect  of chloride ions  on anodic  dissolution was similar to  that  reported by Bockris et  al. (4) for pure  iron. Furthermore, in the 1N  H2SO4  + 0.1N  NaC1 solution, the  passive range  terminated at  the  same  potentials as in  the 1N  H2SO4.  Similar  polarization  behavior  was observed  for  Type 434 and all  17%  chromium alloys.

## Discussion

Pitting  potentials in 0.1N  hydrochloric  acid.--The examination of the average  pitting potentials for  the 17% chromium  alloys  (Table  IV)  discloses that,  as the  molybdenum content is increased, pitting potentials become more noble (i.e., the  resistance toward pitting corrosion  increases with the molybdenum  content). Since a normal transpassive transition was  obtained for  the  17%  Cr-3%  Mo  alloy, this  material should  be immune  to pitting corrosion under the experimental conditions. However,  Types 430  and  434, which  are commercial counterparts of the 17% chromium  and 17%  Cr-l% Mo  alloys, have significantly lower  pitting potentials. This  difference in  pitting potentials is  probably  the result of the higher  carbon  levels  and impurity  contents  of commercial steels, as  compared

The values  of  pitting potentials are  significantly influenced  by experimental techniques  (5,  6).  In work with  molybdenum-containing austenitic stainless steels, a fast  potential scanning  rate  was  a more severe  experimental condition than a slow scanning  rate (7). Consequently, the instantaneous potential rise  from the  active corrosion potential to  a selected passive potential would be  one  of  the  most severe  experimental conditions for  the  potentiostatic pitting studies. That the  17%  Cr-3%  Mo  alloy  could be pitted by the  above method  implies  that all  the materials  investigated would pit  under  conditions of instantaneous potential jump.  Thus,  the  results from the  potentiodynamic pitting studies would at  best  predict only  a relative order of  resistance to  pitting corrosion, but  would not  necessarily determine  the immunity  to pitting at a given chloride ion  concentration and temperature.

Polarization studies  in hydrochloric ac/d.--The results of  the  critical current density and primary  passivation  potential determination in 0.1N and 1.0N  HC1 are consistent with  previous measurements  in  H2SO4, i.e., molybdenum decreases the  critical current density required to produce  passivity and,  to a lesser extent, shifts the  primary  passivation potential to  more active potentials (1).  Thus,  molybdenum  additions facilitate the attainment of the  passive  state for  ferritic stainless steels in  HC1. This  effect was especially pronounced in 1N  HC1 for high-purity alloys  (Fig.  6).  In this series, only alloys  containing molybdenum  could  be completely passivated in  1N  HC1, i.e., the  current densities for  masked electrodes decreased to  between  10  -8 and 10  -7 amp/cm  2 at  some  potential beyond the  pri-

i

mary passivation potential. In  contrast o such pure alloys  as 17% chromium  alloy, the  commercial  Type 430 did not show  a critical behavior  in 1N  HC1,  and Type 434 showed little tendency  to  passivate (Fig. 5). This behavior  is  probably  the  result of the depletion of the ferritic matrix  of chromium  and molybdenum by the  precipitation of carbides.

Small nickel  additions to 18% Cr-2% Mo alloys were somewhat beneficial to  the  attainment of passivity  in 0.1N HC1,  since  these additions depressed  the critical current  density to the point  where no active region  was displayed. However, results from work on austenitic stainless steels (7) showed that  an 18%  Cr16%  Ni alloy  free  of  molybdenum  could  not  be completely passivated in  1N  HC1, but  a similar alloy  containing  molybdenum  could be. Thus, the beneficial effects of small  nickel  additions to ferritic stainless steel  in HC1 may  be  limited  to the molybdenumcontaining  rades.

Polarization studies in  HC1  solutions revealed  that HC1  is  an effective medium  for  the potentiodynamic investigation of the effects of alloying elements  on the corrosion  and passivation properties of stainless steels. The effects of molybdenum  additions  are very dramatically shown by polarization curves  in  1N  HC1; it  is  expected  than any alloying addition which has a strong  effect on the passive  film  will  also  have a pronounced  effect  on the active-passive transition in HC1.  Polarization curves  in  0.1N HC1,  especially with the 17%  chromium alloy, were characterized by considerable variations in critical current  density  and primary passivation potential. Such  behavior  would probably  result from the competition of the normal tendency  of  the  alloy  to passivate in a weakly acidic medium  with the activating effect  of the chloride ions. Stainless steels with  relatively weak  passivation tendencies would  therefore  be  expected to have  a more prominently variable passivation behavior  than steels with a strong  passivation tendency. The activepassive  transition region  in  O.IN  HC1  was often  complicated by the  presence  of  two current density maxima.  Since  measured  current is  the  difference between the total  oxidation and total  reduction  current, the small secondary current maxima might  arise from the changing  hydrogen evolution kinetics, which are the result of  the  passivation of  the  electrode surface. However,  large  secondary  peaks observed  with  Type  430 steel could not be  explained. Since  the potential for either  peak  is fairly reproducible,  the double-peak phenomenon for  the  Type 430 steel might result from the chromium  segregation and  different passivation behavior of chromium-rich  and  chromium-depleted regions. For  the Type 434 steel, which has a stronger passivation tendency, the  second  peak is  only  slightly indicated (Fig.  1).  Some  support for  the  above  speculation is  given  by the  work  of Voeltzel  and Plateau (8) who  observed a  double-peak  phenomenon  for sensitized austenitic 16%  Cr-8%  Ni stainless steel. The double-peak  phenomenon was  ascribed  to chromium depletion along  the  grain  boundaries.

None of  the  ferritic stainless steels studied was immune to  crevice corrosion in  HC1, not  even  those  which had a high  resistance to  pitting.

Polarization studies in  sulfuric acid-sodium  chloride solution.---Since a  complete  passive range  was obtained for  all the  materials studied, the  results from potentiodynamic  polarization studies in  1N H2SO4 q-  0.1N NaC1 indicate that  sulfate ions  in  the  SO4=:C1 - molar  ratio of  5:1  inhibit pitting corrosion. The  inhibiting effect of sulfate ions  on chloride pitting of austenitic steels has been described in the literature (5,  9).  This investigation showed  that  pitting corrosion  of ferritic stainless steel can also  be inhibited by sulfate ions. Furthermore, since  crevice corrosion was very  prominent in 0.1N HC1,  it  may  be concluded  that  sulfate ions  suppress the  crevice  corrosion to the extent  that a normal  transpassive transition can be obtained with a potential scanning rate  of  0.540  v/hr.

## Summary

Molybdenum additions  to  ferritic stainless steels facilitated the attainment of passivity in 0.1 and 1N HCI.

The pitting potential in  0.1N HC1  became more noble with increased  molybdenum  content  for high-purity 17% chromium  alloys  and  with increased  titanium content  for 18% Cr-2%  Mo-0.03% C  alloys. An  increase  in carbon content  generally resulted  in less noble pitting potentials, whereas small  nickel  additions  (up to 1%)  did  not  change  the  pitting potential significantly.

All the ferritic stainless steels studied  were  very sensitive to  crevice corrosion in  HC1.

The sulfate ions,  in a molar ratio of  SO4=:C1  -  of 5:1 not  only  inhibited pitting corrosion but also  suppressed  crevice corrosion for  all the  steels investigated.

Manuscript  submitted Sept.  16,  1968;  revised manuscript  received Feb.  3,  1969.  This  paper  was presented at the Chicago  Meeting, Oct.  15-19,  1967, as  Paper  60.

Any  discussion of this  paper  will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to  be  published in  the  December 1969 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  E.  A.  Lizlovs, Corrosion, 22,  297t  (1966).
2.  W.  Schwenk, 2nd International Congress  on Metallic Corrosion, NACE,  Houston,  Texas,  256 (1966).
3.  N. D. Greene,  W.  D. France,  Jr., and B. E. Wilde, Corrosion, 21, 275  (1965).
4.  J. O'M.  Bockris,  D.  Drazic, and  A.  R.  Despic, Electrochim. Acta, 4, 325  (1961).
5.  G.  Herbsleb, Werksto~e und  Korrosion, 16~  929 (1965)  ; 17, 649 (1966).
6.  H.  P. Leckie and H.  H.  Uhlig, This Journal, 113, 1262 (1966).
7.  A. P.  Bond and  E.  A.  Lizlovs, ibid., 115,  1130  (1968).
8.  J.  Voeltzel and J.  Plateau, Compt. rend., 254, 1791 (1962)  ; 256,  2156 (1963).
9.  C.  TrabaneUi and  F. Zucchi, Corrosion et Anticorrosion, 13, 207  (1965).