## Effect of Supplementary  Alloying  Elements On Pitting  Corrosion Susceptibility Of 18Cr-14Ni  Stainless  Steel*

By N.  D.  TOMASHOV, * G. P. CHERNOV A*  and 0. N.  MARCOV A*

## Introduction

U NDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS, many metals and  alloys  are  often  subject to  pitting corrosion, i.e., distinct deterioration of  metal at separate local points, leaving  the  remainder of the  surface  intact.

The tremendous volume of  experimental material at present available on  the  subject warrants the  conclusion that pitting is  primarily due to  an imperfect state of passivity at various local points on the metal surface. Thus, it must be recognized that the main cause of pitting is  that, for  some  reason,  steadily functioning cor­ rosion couples develop: active metal (  anode )-passive metal (cathode)  . 1 - 10 Therefore, studies of pitting cor­ rosion  and  pursued in  two  directions:

1. The  establishment of specific  causes  for  the  initiation on  the  passive  metal surface of  distinct points of  break­ down  or weakening  of the  passive  state.
2.  Investigation of  optimum conditions for the stable operation of  the  corrosion couples:  active  metal (anode)­ passive metal (cathode)  .

The  general viewpoint is  that local  breakdown of  the passive state, usually observed in pitting corrosion, is primarily due  to  the  presence of  halogen ions  in  the  ex­ ternal  passivating  medium.

It has  been  proved time and again by  direct experi­ ments that the breakdown of passivity is  preceded by the  adsorption of  halogen ions  on  the  metal surface. 1 ·  5 ·  7 This, however, does not explain the well-defined local nature of pitting corrosion. The theories advanced on pitting corrosion offer different explanations for  the lo­ cal  nature of  this  type  9f  corrosion, namely: penetration of  active  anions  through the  defects  in  the  phase  passive film, 3 ·  6 replacement of  oxygen atoms at seperate points of  the  adsorption film  by  active anions,1·  5 ·  7 ·  8 emergence of  dislocations on  the  metal surface, 11 and even  the  de­ velopment of an instantaneous difference in potential in  the  double layer, due to  fluctuations in the thermal mobility of  molecules. 12 In fact, all  of  these  theories at­ tribute the  process  of  pitting developments to  the  estab­ lishment of  more  or  less  stable  anodic areas on  the  pas­ sive metal  surface.

Of  particular practical importance are the investiga­ tions on the pitting corrosion phenomenon of  stainless steels,  inasmuch as  this  type  of  corrosion destruction defi­ nitely limits the utilization of this important structural material in  modern technology.

* Submitted for  publication April 16,  1963.  A  paper presented at the  Second International Congress on Metallic Corrosion, March 11-15, 1963,  New York,  N. Y.

* Institute of  Physical Chemistry, Academy of  Sciences, Moscow, U.S.S.R.

## Abstract

This investigation  was  conducted  because the development  of  new  alloys  with  increased re­ sistance to pitting corrosion  appears to be largely dependent  on an  understanding  of the effects of various concentrations of alloying ele­ ments on the initiation  and  steady  operation  of localized  pitting  sites on the  metal  surface.

Corrosion tests  in 0.5N FeC'3 and determi­ nations  of  passivity  breakdown potentials in 0.1 N  NaCl  were  employed  to study  the  pitting tendencies of 18 Crl 4Ni stainless steels to which  alloying  elements in various concentra­ tions had  been  added.  The  alloying  elements, chosen for their  stability  in solutions  containing chloride  ions and  their  solubility  in  austenite, were: Mo,  Si, V,  W,  Ti, Ce,  Nb, Ta,  Zr  and  Re.

Mo,  Si and  V,  respectively, at  5  percent con­ centration,  had  the  most marked effect in in­ creasing  resistance to  pitting.  Re, even in  con­ centrations below l percent, was also very effective.  The  other  elements tested  had  either a  negative  influence or no effect.

Heat  treatment in  the  dangerous  tempera­ ture  zone  (650  C for  2  hours) greatly  impaired the  resistance of  steel  alloyed with  5  percent Mo,  Si or  V,  which  is not susceptible to  pitting corrosion in the quenched state.

Although, as  pointed out  above,  there  may  be  a  num­ ber of reasons for the breach in passivity of separate local points on the stainless steel surface, the primary, basic  reason  must  be  the  possible,  if not  practically the  in­ variable, existence of  heterogeneity in the metal struc tu-re and  composition.

Thus, according to the data in  Reference 9, pitting occurs  mainly  at  the  grain  boundaries. It  is  a  well  known fact that, as  far  as  physical structure and  chemical  com­ position are  concerned, the  grain boundaries differ  from the bulk of the grain and precipitation of secondary phases and accumulation of  impurities are liable to  oc­ cur at the grain boundaries. For this  reason the  passive state at  the  grain boundaries is  lower  in  proctetive prop­ erties than on the grain proper. It seems  that the site where  pitting develops  also  depends on  the character of the surface pretreatment and on the aggressiveness of the  electrolyte.

TABLE 1-Percentages of Alloying Elements in Expe,rimentcal Alloys with 18Cr-14Ni Stainless Steel Base

| Supplementary Alloying Element   | Weight Percent           |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Ti. ...                          | 0.19 0.22 o.:31          |
| Zr ....                          | 0.60                     |
| Ta ..                            | 0.6:30 0.735 1.000 2.070 |
| Nb ..                            | 0.92 1.:10 2.18          |
| Ce.                              | 0.2* 0.fi* 1.0*          |
| Re.                              | 0.22 0.50 0.99 2..5*     |
| Si.                              | l.45 3.30 4.74           |
| V. ....                          | l.00 2.25 4.75           |
| W..                              | 0.18 1.50 2.67           |
| Mo ..                            | 1.47 2.75 5.0*           |

In  some  instances, pitting may  be  due to the precipi­ tation of  secondary phases resulting in  heterogeneity of metal composition. In  the  presence of  ferritic inclusions, austenitic steels  become increasingly susceptible to  pitting corrosion. This may be due to the fact that at the boundaries with the ferritic inclusions, austenitic areas are depleted in chromium, because of the increase in chromium content of  the  ferrite.

The compositions of stainless steels along with their structures play a  decisive role as  far as  pitting corrosion is  concerned. A most  positive effect on  the resistance of stainless steels to pitting corrosion can be observed by alloying these steels  with elements capable of  increasing the stability of their passive state, such as  chromium, and  molybdenum. 9 '  13 An increase in the nickel and ni­ trogen contents of  chromium-nickel steels also  increases their resistance to pitting corrosion. The positive effect shown  by  these  elements is  believed to  be  due to  the  for­ mation of  a  more stable, homogeneous austenitic struc­ ture. 9 According to  Reference 9,  alloying with small  con­ centrations of silicon (  up to 2.5  percent) increases the resistance of the alloy to pitting corrosion, due to the changes produced at the grain boundaries. According to other data, 14 the positive effect produced by silicon is due to the increased stability of the passive state, re­ sulting from the increase in the silicon content of the protective film.

There still  remains a  broad field for research on the problem of  fighting corrosion of stainless steels by spe­ cial alloying. First of  all, the effect of various alloying elements on  the variations in the intensity and the na­ ture of  pitting corrosion has not as  yet been adequately studied. Secondly, there is still no clear concept about the  mechanisms involved in  rendering stainless steels  less susceptible to pitting corrosion by the specific effect of the  alloying elements. To  date, there is  still  no  clean-cut answer  to  the  question of  whether the  main and  primary

Figure 1-Effect of alloying elements on the rate of corrosion of l 8Cr-14Ni steel in  0.5N FeCI,.  The test lasted 68 hours  at r~om temperature.

<!-- image -->

effect of alloying elements is to reduce the probability of the development of pits in initial corrosion sites, or whether the effect is  purely that of retardation of the rate of development of these pitting sites. Solution of these problems is  naturally of great importance to the development of  new alloys endowed with increased re­ sistance  to  pitting corrosion.

## Experimental  Work

This work, therefore, is  primarily devoted to the ef­ fects  produced by  different alloying elements in  increas­ ing  the resistance of  austenitic chromium-nickel steels  to pitting corrosion and to site initiation and spread of pitting corrosion, depending on the steel composition. The first  experimental alloys  were based on CRES steels of the type 18Cr-14Ni, which had the following per­ centage composition: Cr,17.93; Ni,14.38; C,0.036; addi­ tional alloying elements: Mo,  Si,  V,  W,  Ti, Cc,  Nb,  Ta, Zr, Re, i.e.,  elements possessing some  degree of  stability in solutions containing Cl ions and endowed with marked solubility in  austenite. Each of  these  supplemen­ tal alloying elements was introduced in the following concentrations: Mo, W, Si,  V,1, 2  and 5, respectively; Ce,0.2, 0.5, 1  and 1.5; Ti, Nb, Ta, 0.5, 1  and 1.5,  re­ spectively; Re, 0.5, 1,  1.5  and 2.5  percent. The content of these alloying elements in the alloys, according to chemical analysis data, is  presented in Table 1. Con­ sidering that Mo,  W  and  V  are  ferrite-forming elements, the  aforementioned steel,  with increased Ni  content, was taken to  preserve the austenitic structure. Thirty differ­ ent compositions were thus ~Jrepared and investigated. The steels  were smelted in an electric induction fur­ nace under slag.  The ingots were  forged, rolled into  bars 2  mm thick, then tempered at 1150 C (  heating for 15 minutes) and quenched in water. Metallographic examination after quenching showed that the steel had an austenitic structure and that only the steel  with 5 percent Si exhibited an a phase.

figure 2-Somples of 18Cr-14 Ni  steels alloyed with Mo,  V,  Si,  Re,  W,  Ti,  To,  Ce,  Nb  and Zr  ofter corrosion testing in  0.SN FeCb  for  68 hours at room  temperature. The figures below the photographs show  the content (weight percent) of the alloying element.

<!-- image -->

Susceptibility of  the investigated steels  to  pitting cor­ rosion  was  established by  the rate of  corrosion in  0.5N FeCl 3. Inasmuch as  under the experimental conditions the stainless  steels  were  only  subject to  pitting corrosion and there was practically no over-all corrosion, the weight losses  simply  characterize the rate of  pitting cor­ rosion. Figure 1  shows  the  dependence of  the corrosion rate of 18Cr-l 4Ni stainless steels in a  0.5N FeCl 3 so­ lution on supplementary alloying with the investigated elements. In Figure 2  are  presented photographs of  the test  specimens  at  the  end  of the  experiments.

## Results

## Pitting Corrosion  Resistance

It  follows  from  the  data obtained that the  alloys  most resistant t0  pitting corrosion are the steels  alloyed with 5  percent Mo, 5  percent V and 5  percent Si.  The cor­ rosion  rate of  these  steel  specimens was  of  the  order of magnitude 0.01  gm/sq m/hour, with  external appearance unchanged and the same as before experimental ex­ posures. Considerable increase in resistance to pitting corrosion is also exhibited by steels alloyed with 2.5

percent V, 2.5 percent Si, 2.5  percent Mo and 0.2-1 percent Re. It must be  pointed out that unlike other metals, Re  produces a  considerable effect in  enhancing the  resistance of  steels  to  pitting corrosion at  much  lower concentrations of  the  element in  the  alloy,  compared to Mo,  V  and  Si.  A  number of  alloying  elements  such  as  Ti, Ce  or  Nb,  have a  negative effect. For  Ta and vV com­ pletely indeterminate results were  obtained. Apparently, these elements affect the susceptibility of the steel to pitting corrosion  but  little.

Susceptibility to  pitting corrosion was  also  established by way of determining the breakdown potentials in anodic polarization in  0.lN NaCl  solution, using  a  tech­ nique  described  earlier  in  References 13, 15 and  16.

## Passivity  Breakdown  Potentials

The data obtained in these anodic breakdown po­ tentials of the passive film (Figure 3) in 0.lN NaCl basically correspond to  the data obtained in the corro­ sion  experiments. Thus, steels  alloyed  with 5  percent V or  5  percent Si  did not break down  up to a  potential of 1.5v (  relative to the normal hydrogen electrode).

Figure 3-Effect of alloying elements on the breakdown potential (Eh) of  18Cr-14Ni  steel  in O.lN  NaCl.  Temperature, 25 C

<!-- image -->

Steel  with 5  percent Mo  did  break down  at  a  potential of 1.2v. In steels  containing 1  percent and 2.5  percent Re,  a  considerable rise  in  the  breakdown potentials was observed,  compared to  those  of  18Cr-14Ni steels  without the supplemental allowing element, the  breakdown po­ tential of  which is +  0.64v. Some  deviation from the tlata  was  obtained in  the  corrosion experiments on  steels alloyed with Ti and Ce, in that there was  no specific effect  on  the  breakdown potential.

It follows  from the data obtained that steels  contain­ ing  about 2.5  and  5  percent Si,  2.5  and 5  percent Mo,  5 percent V  and 0.2-1 percent Re are most resistant to pitting corrosion. The results obtained on the effect of Mo  are  in  agreement with data reported in the litera­ ture. There is  also  information in the literature on  the effect  of  Si  on  the susceptibility of  steels  to  pitting cor­ rosion,  when the  amount alloyed is  2.5  percent. 9 How­ ever, there are  no  data on  the effect of  enhancing the resistance to  pitting corrosion by  increasing the Si  con­ tent  beyond 2.5  percent, as  was  observed in  the  authors' experiments. The considerable reduction in  the  suscepti­ bility of  stainless steels to pitting corrosion by alloying with  vanadium and rhenium was  first  established in  the present  investigation.

## Effects of  Alloying Elements on  Pit  Distribution

In order to  determine the effect  of  supplementary al­ loying  on  the character of  pit distribution over  the steel surface, an  investigation was  made of  the initiation sites of pitting on chromium-nickel steels alloyed with Mo, Si  and V.  These experiments were performed both in the process of anodic polarization in 0. lN NaCl and 0.0lN NaBr solutions, as well as in corrosion tests in 0.5N  FeCls.

## Pitting  Initiation Sites  During  Polarization

In order to determine the sites of pitting initiation during the anodic polarization process, an experimental assembly was  used,  schematic  diagram of  which  is  shown

<!-- image -->

l±:::::::::::::=:=::::::::::::=====:::::::===:::.::=~-------

Figure  4-lnstallation for  observing  under  the  microscope the  site  of the initiation of pitting during anodic polarization: ( l) microscope lens;  (2) circular wire  electrode, Pt  (cathode); (3) platinum  electrode (anode); (4) sample; (5) capillary for measuring potentials; (6) organic  glass  funnel  whose  lower  plane  was  fixed an  the  surface  of the  sample;  (7) porous glass filter; (8) cathodic  voltmeter; (9) organic glass vessel.

in Figure 4. Pitting initiation was observed through a microscope on  the anodic zone  of  a  polished test  speci­ men surface, limited by an orifice of 1  mm diameter in  the  funnel of  the  vessel.  The first  pit  observed  on  the weakest spot  of  the passive  film  was  recorded as  pitting initiation. In the case  of  steels  alloyed with 2.5  percent Mo,  2.5  percent Si  and 2.5  percent V, the experiments were conducted in 0.lN NaCl. On steels alloyed with 5  percent Mo, 5  percent V and 5  percent Si,  the ex­ periments were  conducted in  a  0.01N  NaBr solution be­ cause no pitting was observed on these steels in 0.lN NaCl.

Once pitting was  initiated, the voltage in the circuit was  disconnected, the solution sucked out of  the  funnel and  the  specimen surface etched directly under the  fun. nel  without changing the position of  the  specimen. This was  done for the purpose of  establishing surface struc­ ture and  the  pit  initiation site.  The probability of  pitting distribution in  anodic polarization was  calculated in  per­ cent of the total number of  experiments (  the number of  experiments varied between 9  and 11).  The charac­ ter of  pitting distribution over the surface of  quenched steels  was also investigated, using polished steel speci­ mens  in  0.5N  FeCl 3 solutions. The  probability of  pit dis­ tribution in  this  case  was  calculated as  percentage of  the total number of  pits that appeared on each specimen. (The number of  pits  per sq  cm  varied from  8  to  30.)

The data of  both investigations on  the  distribution of pits  over  the structure of  quenched 18Cr-14Ni steels,  as well as on the steels alloyed with supplementary ele­ ments  Si,  V  and  Mo,  are  presented in  Table 2.  The data in  this  table show  that most  pitting on  l 8Cr-l  4Ni  steels including no alloy additions, by anodic polarization in 0.lN NaCl, occurs at the peripheral areas  of  the  grains proper. For steels  with additional 2.5  percent Si,  V or Mo, most of the pitting occurs directly in the grain boundaries. For  steels  with 5  percent Si,  V  or  Mo,  tested by  anodic polarization in  0.01N NaBr solutions, pitting basically occurs along  the  grain boundaries. In  tests  with 0.5N FeCl 3 on steel with no alloying additions, there is  a  characteristic pitting distribution in  the  grain  periph­ eral region, and, in the case of additionally alloyed

TABLE 2-Pitting Distribution on Quenched 18Cr-14 Ni Stainless Steel Alloyed with Si, V or Mo

| Experimental Conditions           | Supplementary Alloying Element, Wt%   | Pitting Distribution Over Steel Structure, %   | Pitting Distribution Over Steel Structure, %   | Pitting Distribution Over Steel Structure, %   |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Experimental Conditions           | Supplementary Alloying Element, Wt%   | Mid-Grain                                      | IPeripheral Areas                              | At Grain Boundaries                            |
| Anodic Polarization in 0.lN NaCl  | None 2.5 Si 2.5 V 2.5 Mo              | 9.1 22.2 i'l'.i                                | 81.8 ... 22.2 22.2                             | 9.1 77.8 77.8 66.7                             |
| Anodic Polarization in 0.0lN NaBr | None 5 Si 5V 5 Mo                     | ... 16.7 ... ...                               | . .. ... . .. . ..                             | . ... 83.3 100.0 100.0                         |
| Corrosion Tests in 0.5N FeC!a     | None 2.5 Si 2.5 V                     | 22.7 6.4 15.6                                  | 52 0.7 3.5                                     | 25.3 92.9 80.9                                 |

steels, directly at the grain boundaries. The authors accepted as  peripheral grain regions the areas directly adjacent to the grain boundaries, the widths of such regions being not more than 10  percent of the linear dimensions of  the grain proper.

Figure 5  shows  photomicrographs of  the sites  where pitting initiated. It  can  be  seen  that on  l 8Cr-14Ni steel anodically polarized in a O.lN NaCl solution, pitting occurs in the peripheral areas of the grain. On steels alloyed  with  2.5  percent Mo  or  2.5  percent Si,  by  anodic polarization in  0.0lN NaBr pitting occurs at the grain boundaries. After  corrosion testing  of  18Cr-14Ni steel  al­ loyed  with 2.5  percent Si  in  0.5N FeC13, pitting occurs along  the  grain  boundaries.

Thus it  can  be  seen  that alloying of  chromium-nickel steel  with Mo, V or  Si  simultaneously increases its re­ sistance  to  pitting corrosion and shifts  the  zone  of  prob­ able  pit  initiation from  the  peripheral areas  of  the  grain to  the grain boundary material. This may  be  regarded as  an  increase  in  stability of  the  passive  state of  the  aus­ tenite grain proper. In  chromium-nickel steels  addition- ally alloyed with Mo, V or Si only a narrow grain boundary zone  remains suceptible to pitting corrosion under very  aggressive  test  conditions. This attests to  the greater stability of  the  passive  film  on  steels  alloyed  with the above elements, with the grain boundaries remain­ ing the weakest spots in the oxide film. In 18Cr-14Ni steels  without additional alloying elements, the passive state  for  the  austenite is  less  stable, so  that a  larger zone near the grain boundaries is  subject to  pitting, thus re­ sulting in  pit initiation in  the  grain peripheral areas.

## Effects of Heat  Treatment

These experiments have  shown  that heat treatment of steel in the dangerous temperature zone (650 C  for 2 hours) strongly enhances their susceptibility to pitting corrosion. This applies not only to 18  Cr-14Ni steel, but also  to  such  steels  additionally alloyed with Mo,  V or Si. In annealed steels,  pitting is  also  confined to  the grain boundaries. Figure 6  shows the external appear­ ance  of  both  quenched and  annealed steels  after the  test m  0.5N  FeCt. It can be  seen that even steels  alloyed

Figure  5-Site of pitting initiation on  18Cr-14Ni steels  additionally alloyed  with  Mo and  Si.  The perpendicular  lines  on  the  photograph  represent  the  cross-hairs of  the  microscope eyepiece.  700X, except ph·oto  at extreme right, which  is  200X.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6-The effect of annealing on the sensitivity of 18Cr-14Ni steels to pitting corrosion in O.SN  FeCl3  solution. The experiment lasted 68 hours at room  temperature. Upper row  of specimens were quenched; lower row,  annealed at 650  C  for 2 hours.

<!-- image -->

with 5 percent Mo, V or Si, which are most stable in  FeCl 3 in the quenched state, corrode strongly in the annealed state. After an anneal the steels alloyed with V or Si are very susceptible to pitting corrosion, while the same steels alloyed with Mo or Re are susceptible to intergranular corrosion. The breakdown potentials of  the steels  additionally alloyed with Mo, V or Si  drop considerably after an anneal, almost to the same  potential as  that of  18Cr-14Ni steel  without addi­ tional alloying elements (Table 3). On annealed steel alloyed  with Mo,  after anodic polarization in  0. lN  NaCl solution at a  potential of +  0.81  v,  the etched phase, precipitated along the grain boundaries, can be clearly observed.

An  investigation was  made of  the effect of  Mo,  V,  Si, Re and heat treatment on the stability of the passive state of  chromium-nickel steels, plotting anodic poten­ tiostatic curves. An  electronic potentiostat was used in the experimental technique.17 The electrolyte was 0. lN HCI, because most pitting occurs in acidulated media in  the  presence of  Cl  ions.  The pH of  the HCI  solution was  the same  as  that of  a  0.5N FeCl 3 solution (-1.2) . The curves obtained for quenched and annealed steels alloyed with 5  percent Mo, 5  percent Si  and 2.5 per­ cent  Re  are  shown in  Figures 7  and 8.

In  the quenched state (Figure 7), steel with Mo  ex­ hibits complete spontaneous passivity. There is not a single  area of  anodic dissolution on  the anodic polariza­ tion curve. In 18Cr-l4Ni steel and that alloyed with V, Si  or Re, regions of  active anodic dissolution can be observed. In steels  with 2.5  percent Re or  with 5  per­ cent V, the density of the passivating current, i.e., the maximum density of the anodic dissolution current, before the onset of the passive state, is considerably lower than for 18Cr-l  4Ni without additional alloying elements. The passivating current density of steels alloyed with 5  percent Si  is  approximately the same as that of 18Cr-14Ni steel. The complete passivation po­ tentials of the alloyed steels (  the potentials at the least anodic current density) are less positive (  more active) than the potentials for 18Cr-l4Ni steels. In the

TABLE  3-Breakdown Potentials of 18Cr-14Ni Stainless Steel Alloyed with 5 Percent Mo, V or Si, in the Annealed and Quen.ched States in  0. 1  N  N.a·CI Solution

|                                  | Breakdown Potential, Volts   | Breakdown Potential, Volts    |
|----------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Supplen1.entary Alloying Element | Annealed 2 Hours at 650 C    | Quenched in Water from 1150 C |
| None ..                          | 0.659                        | 0.644                         |
| Mo.                              | 0.810                        | l.20                          |
| V                                | 0.744                        | >1.50                         |
| ..... Si ..                      | 0.659                        | >L50                          |

region of zero to +  0.15v, the alloyed steels exhibit regions of cathodic current densities which indicate a tendency to spontaneous passivation at the indicated potential values.  81

As  can be  seen  from Figure 7,  there is  no  stable pas­ sive state region for 18Cr-14Ni steel, which is  charac­ teristic for this steel for the simple reason that on reaching the  complete passivation potential at  an  increase in the positive potential values, there is a continuous increase in the current, corresponding to pitting initia­ tion on the steel surface. On steels alloyed with Mo, V,  Si  or  Re,  however, there is  a  passive  state  region. Steel with 5  percent Mo  maintains its  stable passive state up to  a  potential of +  l.0v; steel  with 2.5  percent Re,  up  to 0.6v; and on  steel  alloyed with V  and Si  an  increase in the  anodic current can  be  observed at + 0.35v  due  to  the development of  pitting.

Studies on the anodic behavior of annealed steels (Figure 8) show  that the initial segments of  the anodic curves practically coincide with the  curves for  quenched steels up to complete passivation potentials. The only difference is that the annealed steels which are al­ loyed with V, Si or Re have no region of stable pas­ sive state. In the case of steel alloyed with Mo, the passive state is  maintained in a large enough region of potentials up to +  0.55v, beyond which anodic cur­ rent begins to increase because of anodic dissolution, usually  characteristic of intergranular corrosion.

It  follows  from the experimental results obtained that susceptibility to pitting corrosion due to structural heterogeneity caused by the anneal is  expressed in the anodic curves by  the  absence on  them of  the region of a stable passive state, as  shown by the annealed steels alloyed with V, Si or Re, or in the narrowing of the region of the stable passive state. Addition of  Mo, V, Si and Re to chromium-nickel steels enhances their capability to passivate in 0.lN HCl solutions. Si as an alloying element has no effect on the passivating current density of  18Cr-14Ni steels.  However, on  further anodic polarization of steel  with 5  percent Si,  a  region of cathodic current densities as well as a region of a stable passive state can be observed. This indicates that anodic polarization of steels  with Si as  an alloying element results in the formation of  an oxide film with higher protective properties than that formed on non­ alloyed 18Cr-14Ni steel. The enhanced resistance to pitting corrosion of 18Cr-14Ni steels alloyed with Mo, V,  Si and Re  can  be  explained by  the increased stability of the passive protective film clue to the presence of these alloying elements in the composition of the film. It is  known, 14 for instance, that Mo,  Si  and some  other additive elements in  stainless steels  may  be  present in  the protective film  in  higher concentrations than in  the  alloy proper. Diminution of  the  concentration of  the  main  pas­ sivating component, namely chromium, in  separate struc-

Figure 7-Anodic polarization  curves of  quenched 18Cr-14Ni steels alloyed with Mo, Si, V  or Re in 0.1  N  HCI.  Temperature, 20 C.

<!-- image -->

tural  areas  of  the  steel  may  greatly  lower  its  resistance  to pitting  corrosion.  This  was  actually  observed  for  annealed Cr-Ni steels  in  which, during the annealing process in the region of the dangerous temperature of 650 C, chromium carbide precipitated at the grain bound­ aries  so  that the  peripheral regions  of  the solid  solution became  depleted in  chromium. As  a result of  this  im­ poverishment in  chromium, the  film  formed at  the  grain boundaries has  inferior protective properties.

Such heterogeneity in the film  greatly increases the probability of pitting initiation. Therefore, chromium­ nickel steels after an anneal exhibit greater suscepti­ bility to pitting corrosion. In chromium-nickel steels alloyed  with Mo,  V,  or  Re,  the  anneal may  precipitate complex  carbides  at  the  grain  boundaries, including car­ bides of  these alloying  elements along with chromium carbide. As  a  result of  this the peripheral regions be­ come depleted not only in chromium but also in these alloying elements. Thus, it can be assumed that  the  passive  film  will  also  be  impoverished in  these elements  in  the  indicated regions,  so  that their corrosion. resistance will be impaired. It seems, however, that depletion in  chromium concentration in the peripheral regions  is  the decisive  factor in  lowering the resistance of the  alloy to pitting  corrosion.

This is  confirmed by  the behavior of steels  alloyed with  Si.  Silicon  is not  a  carbide-forming element  in  steel, and  a  marked decrease  in  Si content cannot be  expected in  the  annealing  process  in  which  the  carbides  precipitate in  the  grain  boundaries. Yet,  silicon-containing steels  ex­ hibit  intense pitting  after  an  anneal.

Figure  8-Anodic polarization  curves of  annealed  18Cr-14Ni ~teels alloyed with Mo, Si, V  or Re in 0.1  N  HCI.  Temperature, 20 C.

<!-- image -->

## Summary

1.  Investigations were  conducted on  the  effect  of  sup­ plementary alloying of 18Cr-14Ni stainless steels  with Mo,  Si,  V,  Re,  W,  Ti,  Ce,  Nb,  Zr  and  Ta  with respect to susceptibility to pitting corrosion. Corrosion tests in 0.5N FeCl 3 and determinations of the breakdown potentials in  0.lN NaCl solutions  were  employed.

2. It was  demonstrated that the most  positive effect is  exerted by  Mo, Si  and V.  At a  concentration of  5 percent in  18Cr-14Ni steels,  these  elements  impart high resistance to  pitting corrosion. Alloying with Re, even in  small  concentrations (  up to 1  percent) is  highly ef­ fective  in  increasing the  resistance  of  the  steel  to  pitting corrosion.  Ti,  Nb  and  Ce  have  a  negative effect  on  the resistance to  pitting corrosion; Zr,  Ta and W  have  no effect.

3.  In 18Cr-14Ni  steels,  pitting initiates in  the  periph­ eral regions of the grains. On alloying this steel with Mo,  V or  Si,  pitting most  probably initiates directly at the  grain  boundaries.
4.  Enhanced pitting corrosion resistance exhibited by steels  alloyed  with 5  percent Mo,  5  percent Si,  5  per­ cent  V  or  2.5  percent  Re  can  be  explained  by  the  greater :tability  of  the  passive  state, due  to  the  higher  corrosion resistance  of  the  passive  film,  resulting  from  the  inclusion of  these  alloying  elements  in  the  composition of  the  pro­ tective film.

5. Heat treatment in the dangerous temperature zone  (  650  C  for  2  hours) of  steel  not  susceptible to  pit­ ting  corrosion  in  the  quenched state (  alloyed  with 5  per­ cent  Mo,  Si  or V) strongly  impairs the  resistance of  the steel  to pitting corrosion when  alloyed  with Si  and V. Steels  alloyed  with  Mo  or  Re  become  susceptible  to  inter­ granular corrosion  after  annealing.

## References

- I.  A.  N.  Frumkin, V. S.  Bagotsky. Z. A.  Iofa, B.  N.  Kabanov. Kinetics of Electrode Processes.  Moscow  University Press  (  1952).
2.  H.  H.  Uhlig. The  Corrosion Handbook, p  165.  John Wiley  and  Sons,  New York (1948).
3.  U.  R.  Evans.]. of  the  Electrochemical Soc., 103,  No. 1  (1956).
4.  N. D.  Greene and M. G. Fontana. Corrosion, 15,  No. 1,  39t-44t (1959) January.
5.  J.  L. Rosenfeld and W.  R. Maximtschuk. Zeitscher. Phys. Chemie, 215, 2.1-47 (  1960).
6.  H. Graefen. Metallober/laeche, 19,  No. 6, 161  (1959).
7. A.  V. Vanyukova and B. N. Kabanov. Doklady AK. NAUK SSSR, 59, No.  5,  p  917  (1948).
8. Y.  M.  Kolotyrkin and  Y.  Gilman. Doklady AK. NAUK SSR, 137,  No. 3, p  642  (1961).
9. M. A.  Streicher. ]. of the Electr. Soc., 103,  No. 7,  375 (1956).
10.  F.  P.  A.  Robinson. Corrosion Technology, 7,  No.  8  (1960).
- II.  M.  Maeda. Die  Natur Wiessenscha/ten, No.  21,  44  (1957).
12. T. N. Sharonova, N. I. Fedulova and A. I. Krasilshchikov. Transac. of GIAP. Scientific-Technical Publishers of Chemical Literature, v.X., p 407  (1959).
13. N.  D.  Tomashov, N. P.  Zuk  and N. K. Kornich. Production and Treatment  of  Steels  and  Alloys. v.XXXVIII, M.,  p  584  (1958).
14. T.  N.  Rhodin. Corrosion, 12,  No.  3,  123t-135t  (1956)  March.
15. S.  Brennert. Jernkontores Annals, 119,  p  287  (1935).
16. G.  V. Akimov. The Theory and Methods of Investigating the Corrosion of  Metals. Publishers of  the  USSR  Academy of  Sciences (1949).
17. M. N. Fokin and A. F.  Vinogradov. Electronic Potentiostat for Electro­ chemical Studies. Branch of the AUSRTI, Subject 39, No. 11-59-12/1 (1959).
18.  N. D. Tomashov. Symp. Corrosion and Protection of Alloys. Mctallur­ gizdat.
19. N. D. Greene. Corrosion, 18,  No. 4,  136t-142t (1962) April.

## DISCUSSIONS

## Question  by  J.  Kruger,  National  Bureau  of  Standards, Washington, D.C.:

Did the  heterogeneity you  mentioned as  the effect of the addition elements refer to the effect of  the hetero­ geneity  of  the  metal on  the  properties of  the  oxide  film?

## Reply by N. D. Tomashov:

The heterogeneity of  the 18  Cr-14 Ni stainless steel was  not decreased by  the additional alloying with Mo, Si, V or  Re.  We  suppose  that the  increase in  resistance to pitting corrosion of  these alloys  is  a  result of  improving the  passive  film  corrosion resistance due to  presence of the  alloying  elements in  the protective film  composition.

## Question  by  G.  Trabanelli,  University  of  Ferrara, Italy:

I  would  like  to  know  the  opinion of  Professor  Toma­ shov  about  an  influence of  the  alloying  component quoted on  the  secondary passivity range of  the anodic polariza­ tion  curves  of stainless  steel.

## Reply by N. D. Tomashov:

The influence of  additional alloying components such as  Mo, Si,  V  and Re on the secondary passivity range of  18  Cr-14 Ni  stainless steel  was  not  examined in  this study.

## Question  by  R. B.  Mears,  United States  Steel  Corp., Pittsburgh,  Pa.:

Have you also exposed these stainless steels to sea water?

## Reply by N. D. Tomashov:

We  did not carry out such tests  with these stainless steels  in  sea  water. But  later on  we  are  about to  put to the test the most resistant-to-pitting corrosion steels  in sea  water, too.

## Questions  by  A.  Dravnieks,  Armour  Research  Founda­ tion, Chicago, Ill.:

Have you studied the effect of  two alloying  compo­ nents simultaneously? Could  it  occur  that pitting inhibi­ tion by, for instance, 5.0  percent Mo  and 2.0  percent Re, is  much larger than simply additive? Is there any indication of  such synergistic effects?

## Reply by N. D. Tomashov:

The eventual effect  of  two  alloying  components simul­ taneously introduced was  not investigated in this  work. There are  reasons to  expect that such  an  influence may be  larger or  more  effective  than that of  a  singular  added alloying component. We intend to confirm it experi­ mentally in  our subsequent work.

Discussions submitted too late for inclusion with articles will be published in either June or  December issues.