## Temperature as a Crevice Corrosion Criterion*

## R. J. BRIGHAM*

## Abstract

Using temperature as  a crevice corrosion criterion, a  number of commercial and experimental Mo-bearing 18%  Cr  austenitic stainless  steels  have  been  evaluated for crevice corrosion resistance. These \_data have  been  correlated with the  effect of  Mo  content on  the  rate  of  active  corrosion in  the very  aggressive  acid solution expected in  the  crevice itself. Alloyed Mo  has been  found to  play the dominant role in  reducing the  relative rate  of  crevice  corrosion and  in  defining the  go/no-go crevice corrosion behavior in  terms of the crevice corrosion temperature (CCT) in  oxidizing acid chloride solutions. For  18% Cr austenitic stainless  steels the  empirical relationship

CCT  (C) = -(45 ± 5)  + 11 x %Mo

temperature. This  procedure  was continued until  attack  of any  kind  (  edge,  end-grain,  elastic  to metal  crevice, metal  to metal  crevice,  etc)  was  observed.  The  CCT was bracketed by  that 2.5  C  temperature interval  in  which  the  go/no-go characteristics  were  observed.  Go/no-go  results  obtained  in 24  hour  tests  were routinely  confirmed  in 66 hour  tests and in  the  case  of  one  alloy,  the  CCT was found  to be valid for a  30  day  exposure  in  10% FeCb. All  of  the  alloys  were tested  in  the  single-phase  quench-annealed condition  with abraded  surfaces (120  grit silicon carbide).

## Results

Because Mo has  been  found  to  play  the  dominant  role in increasing  resistance  to  crevice  corrosion,  the  results  for several steels  are  plotted  as CCI  vs %Mo as shown in Figure 1. The  values obtained  are  compared  in  Figure  1 with  CPT vs %Mo for  four  families  of  18% Cr austenitic  alloys which have  been  defined  previously.  2  , 3 Chemical  analyses,  CCT, and  pitting  family  for  each  of  the  alloys  are  given in Table 1. Family 1 represents the average family of alloys corresponding to  present  day  commercial  practice.  Family 2  represents a  series  of  alloys  similar  to  Family 1,  but having  a  higher nitrogen content. Family  3  represents a series of  alloys  similar  to  Family  1, but  containing  low Mn (&lt;0.5%  Mn).  Family  4  represents  a series of  high  Si (3.5% Si) stainless  steels.  The  CPT vs %Mo characteristics  of these four families along with the appropriate equation of behavior  are plotted  in Figure  1.

Whereas several distinct families of alloys can be observed  in  the  case  of  pit  initiation resistance,  all of  the alloys  apparently fall  in  the  same  family  with  respect  to crevice corrosion resistance. Their behavior can  be de­ scribed empirically  by

CCT (C) = -(45 ± 5) + H x. %Mo

The  data  are  plotted  as error  bars with  the low temperature

has been found.

In earlier  presentations,1  ' 2 temperature has  been  shown  to be a reliable  pitting  criterion  for  18%  Cr austenitic  stainless steels. For each steel,  a  temperature, called  the critical pitting temperature (CPT),  has  been  found  below  which pits  will  not  initiate  on  a  flat  surface  parallel  to  the  rolling plane  when  the  steel  is exposed  to  oxidizing  acid  chloride solutions.  Molybdenum  plays  the  dominant  beneficial  role in  improving  pit  initiation resistance  as  measured  by  the CPT  while  other  alloying  additions contribute to  a  lesser extent. Several families  of  alloys,  depending  on  chemistry, have been identified.2 , 3 For all of the alloys, edge, end-grain, and crevice attack  have been  observed  to  occur  at temperatures  below  the  CPT.  However,  further  experimen­ tation  has shown  that  there  exists a temperature,  which  we call the  crevice corrosion  temperature (CCT),  below  which no  corrosion  of  any  type  will occur  even  when  the  alloys are tested  in  a geometric  configuration  containing  a built-in crevice.

## Test Method for Determining  CCT

In  order  to  simulate  the  worst  possible crevice configu­ ration, three types of  crevices  have  been  used:  metal  to metal,  Teflon  to  metal,  and  rubber  (elastic  band)  to metal. The testing method adopted is an extension of the technique which proved successful for the quantitative evaluation  of  pit  initiation resistance.  Samples  of  stainless steel have been exposed  to  10% FeCb  for 24 hours  at fixed temperature in  at  least  two  of  the  three  crevice  configura­ tions  mentioned above.  At  the  end  of  one  such  exposure period, the stainless  steel  was  examined visually.  If  no corrosion  attack  of  any  type  could  be observed,  the sample was considered  to  be  immune  at  that  temperature  and was then exposed  for  a  further 24  hours at a  2.5  C  higher

*submitted for  publication May,  1974.

*Endako  Mines  Molybdenum Research,  568  Booth  Street,  Ottawa, Ontario,  Canada.  KlA  OG 1.

FIGURE 1 -Crevice corrosion temperature (CCT) and critical pitting temperature (CPT)  as  a  function of  molyb­ denum content for several austenitic stainless steels. The numbers  associated with  the  CCT  data  refer  to  alloys  listed  in Table 1,  while the numbers on the CPT  data denote the pitting  families  listed  in the  same  table.

<!-- image -->

end denoting no attack and the high tern  perature end denoting attack.  Within  the 10  C  scatter-band, no  distin­ guishing features  can be observed for alloys on the upper  or lower  limits  of  the  band.  Alloyed  Mo, however,  produces the well established trend toward higher resistance to crevice corrosion  with  increasing  additions  shown  in Figure 1.

While the  CPT  parameter describes  conditions  for  the nucleation  of  pits  on  a  flat  surface,  the  CCT parameter  is related to the conditions for zero growth rate of a pre-existing  pit or  other occluded cell.  These quantities therefore are  characteristic of  the  most  severe  (CCT)  and least  severe (CPT) degrees  of  occlusion possible.  Conse­ quently, most alloys in service conditions in chloride solutions such  as  sea  water  would  be  expected to  have resistance between these extremes, depending on the severity '-- the  crevice condition  encountered. For  samples with  severe artificial  crevices exposed  3 years in sea water  in Halifax Harbor (maximum temperature 15  C),  go/no-go crevice corrosion  behavior  was observed which is consistent with  the  data  in Figure  1. For  example,  Alloys 7, 10,  13, 15 which contain more than 5.6%  Mo,  showed  no  crevice attack,  while  Alloy  5 and similar alloys containing  less than 4.5% Mo were attacked  during this exposure.

## Rate  of Crevice Corrosion

The  data  presented above  for  CCT  vs %Mo, although empirical in nature, have established a limit for the resistance for 18% Cr  austenitic alloys  in  oxidizing  acid chloride media. They also  serve  as  a  basis  for a  better understanding of  the  crevice corrosion  phenomenon  when considered  in  combination with  other  observations.  Picker­ ing and Frankenthal 4 observed that hydrogen gas  is produced  in  occluded  cells in  stainless  steels.  This  observa­ tion  unequivocally  fixed  the  potential-pH  conditions  in the occluded geometry below  the  hydrogen line  and  in  the active  corrosion  region  of  the  Pourbaix  diagram.  Suzuki et al 5 measured the chloride concentration and  pH  of  the solution  in  artificial  occluded  cells and  found  values of the order  of  6.5N  chloride  and  pH  = 0 for Mo-bearing stainless steels  corroding  galvanostatically in  0.5N  NaCl  bulk  solu­ tion.  If  the  maximum  acidity  were  approximately pH=  -1, and  the  maximum  chloride  content  approximately 1  OM  for the  most  severe conditions, the  chemistry  of  the  occluded area  could  be  considered  to  approach  that  of concentrated HCl (37 .5% HCI). It is  therefore possible  to  estimate the relative rates of  crevice  corrosion by  studying  the  active corrosion rate of stainless steels in concentrated HCI. Molybdenum  content and  temperature, the  dominant  fac­ tors in determining  CCT, were chosen  as the variables.

## Corrosion  Rates  in HCI

Coupons  of  several of the alloys listed in Table  1, along with  several commercial  AISI steels of various Mo contents, were  exposed for 4  hours in  nitrogenated concentrated (37 .5%) HCl at  0,  25,  and  50  C (32,  77, and  122 F).  From the  measured  weight  losses, the  corrosion  rate  in inches per month  (ipm)  was  calculated.  As in  the CCT determination,

TABLE  1 Chemical Analyses  (Wt%)

| Alloy                            | Heat Number                                                                                      | Cr                                                                                                 | Ni                                                                                             | Mn                                                                                    | C                                                                                            | N                                                                                             | Si                                                                                    | p                                                                                                   | s                                                                                                   | Cu                                                                            | Mo                                                                  | CCT (C)                                                                                                  | Pitting Family                                          |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 | 8682-4 8427-4 7903-1 7466-2 7580-2 Alloy A 7580-3 Alloy B 8426 7579-3 7995 Alloy D 7580-4 7466-4 | 18.3( I) 17.62 18.89 19.0(I) 19.0( I) 17.3 18_0< 1 ) 15-17 19.38 18.0( I) 18.67' 18.95 17.88 18.00 | 20_3(I) 12.51 15.13 20.0( 1 ) 20.0( I) 23.8 19 0(1) 24-27 22.68 19.0(1) 23.8 23.61 18.96 18.93 | 0.36(I) 1.66 (2) 0 09( I) 0.96(I) 1.72 0.9il) <2.0 0.38 0.95( 1 ) 0.46 1.73 0.89 0.08 | 0.04{I) 0.02 002 0.03(!) 0.03( I) O.Q18 0.03( 1 ) <0.08 0.04 0.02< 1 ) 0.043 0.038 0.03 0.07 | 0 19{I) 0.07 (2) 0 20( I) 020< 1 ) 0.034 0.20< 1 ) 0.10-0.20 0.20 0.06(!) 0.224 (2) 0.20 0.19 | 3_5( I) 0.71 (2) 0 33< 1 ) 0.4i I) 0.44 0.44(!) <1 0 0.47 0.48(I) 0.33 0.81 0.43 0.32 | 0.009(I) 0.012 (2) 0.016( 1 ) 0.012( 1 ) 0.010 o.01i 1 l (2) 0.014 0.011(1) O.Q13 0.013 0.012 0.019 | 0.005( I) 0.013 (2) 0.011(1) 0.012< 1 ) 0.004 0.012( I) (2) 0.014 0.015( I) 0.008 0.004 0.013 0.015 | (2) (2) (2) 0.01(1) 0.01(1) (2) 0.02< 1 ) (2) (2) 0.02< 1 ) (2) (2) 0.02 0.02 | 3.79 3.85 4.05 4.45 4.48 4.60 5.60 6.0 6.04 6.18 6.3 6.50 7.30 7.40 | 2.5-5 <-2.5 <-2.5 7.5-10 10-12.5 2.5-5.0 15-17.5 17.5-20 25-27.5 17.5-20 32.5-35 27.5-30 40-42.5 42.5-45 | (4) (1) (1) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (3) (1) (3) (31 (2) (2) |

Note: Alloys 6.  8.  and  12 are commercial alloys.

(I) Not  an 9 1yzed. but  extrapolated from other splits of  the  same  heat  which were  analyzed.

(l) Not  analyzed

FIGURE 2 -Corrosion  rate  as a function  of  molybdenum content  for  austenitic  stainless steels exposed to  nitrogenated concentrated  (37.5%)  HCI  for  4 hours.

<!-- image -->

the  alloys were tested  in  the  single phase quench  annealed condition  with  surfaces abraded  on  120 grit silicon carbide paper.

## Results

The  results  are  plotted as  corrosion  rate  (ipm)  vs Mo content  in  Figure  2.  Equivalent  current densities  are  also shown,  assuming for  simplicity  that  all of  the  ions go into solution  in  the  2+  valence  state. At  low  Mo  levels,  the corrosion  rate  decreases logarithmically  with  increasing Mo content. At rates less than 10- 3 ipm (2.5  ·x 10- 3 cm/month),  weight loss results become inaccurate  and seem to  represent  the  minimum  readily  measurable  in  this  type of  experiment. However,  if  the  curves are extrapolated as shown to a typical passive current  density (i.e., 3µA/cm 2 ), 6 the  Mo level expected  to  be  required  to  attain  this current density at each temperature can be determined. For example,  at  0,  25,  and  50  C approximately  4.5,  6,  and 8% Mo respectively are expected  to  be  needed  for  a corrosion rate  characteristic  of  passivity  in  these  steels.  When these values are  compared  with  the  CCT (%Mo vs temperature) data of Figure l,  a reasonable correlation  is obtained.

## Discussion

Using two  independent  testing  techniques,  temperature has  been shown  to  be a reliable criterion for  defining go/no-go conditions  for  crevice corrosion  in wholly austen- itic  stainless  steels  containing  nominally 18% Cr. Kn  these steels,  alloyed  Mo  plays  the  dominant role  in  increasing crevice  corrosion resistance  while,  in  contrast to  the  pit initiation  parameters,  the effects  of other  alloying additions have  been  found  to  be  minimal.  Alloys with  CPT varying from  Family  1 to  Family  4 in Figure  1 have been shown to have  the  same  CCT characteristics  within  the  ±5  C scatter band.  Although  the  theoretical  significance of  these data is not  clear  at  present,  the  CCT values can be  used  to  define empirically  the  limits  of  immunity of  stainless  steels  to crevice corrosion in an environment  such as sea water which has  a  chloride  activity  similar  to  the  FeCh solution  used here.

Apart from the effect of alloyed Mo  in defining go/no-go crevice corrosion  behavior,  the  results of figure  2 show  the effect of Mo  on  the  relative  rates  of  crevice corrosion  attack for  18% Cr  austenitic  steels  at  tempera­ tures  above  the  CCT. Even when  attack  is expected,  these data  show  that  a  10-fold decrease  in  corrosion  rate  can be expected  with  a  1.5% increase  in alloyed Mo. Although  the absolute values of  CCT  may  be  such that choosing  a completely resistance steel is  impractical, important de­ creases in  corrosion  rate  can  be  expected  with  higher  Mo stainless steels.

## Acknowledgmellllt§

The  cooperation of  the  Physical  Metallurgy  Division, Department of  Energy,  Mines,  and  Resources  in  making their  facilities  available and  helpful  discussions with  Dr. G. J.  Biefer (Head)  and  Dr.  J.B.  Gilmour (Research Scientist) of  the  Corrosion  Section,  Physical  Metallurgy Division, are gratefully acknowledged.

## Reference§

- l. R. J. Brigham  and E.  W.  Tozer. Temperature as a Pitting Criterion,  Corrosion,  Vol. 29, p.  33 (1973).
2.  R.  J.  Brigham and  E.W.  Tozer.  Effect  of Alloying Additions  on the Pitting Resistance of 18%  Cr  Austenitic Stainless  Steel, Corrosion,  Vol. 30, p.  161 (1974).
3. R. J. Brigham  and  E.  W. Tozer.  Pitting  Resistance  of  Specialty High Silicon Austenitic  Stainless Steels, Unpublished  work.
4.  H.  W. Pickering  and R.  P. Frankenthal. On  the  Mechanism  of Localized Corrosion of Iron and Stainless Steel, l. Electro­ chemical Studies, J. Electrochem. Soc., Vol. 119,  p. 1297 (I 972).
5.  T. Suzuki, M.  Yamabe, and Y. Kitamura. Composition of Anolyte Within Pit  Anode of Austenitic Stainless Steels  in Chloride  Solution,  Corrosion,  Vol. 29, p.  18 (1973).
6.  R. J. Brigham. Pitting of Molybdenum Bearing Austenitic Stainless Steel, Corrosion,  Vol. 28, p.  177 (1972).