## Temperature as a Pitting Criterion*

## R. J. BRIGHAM and E. W. TOZER*

## Abstract

On  the  basis of  three  independent test  methods,  two potentiostatically controlled and  one  freely corroding,  temperature has been shown  quantitatively to be an  important criterion for  describing  the onset  of  pitting corrosion in  molybdenum containing austenitic stainless steels. The  temperature at which  pitting is initiated in  acid  chloride  solution  has been related to  the\molybdenum content  of  the alloys.

In  an  earlier  presentation, 1 the  pitting  characteristics  of  a series of  molybdenum  containing austenitic  stainless steels were presented  as a function  of potential  and temperature. These data,  reproduced  in Figure 1, are characterized by an intermediate, strongly  temperature dependent, potential range which is bracketed  at  lower and higher potentials  by plateaus which are insensitive to  temperature  changes. The upper plateau has been  shown  I to  result  from the  onset of transpassivity.

It  is  only  in  the  intermediate  potential  range that  the relative  pitting resistance  of  the  series  of  alloys  can  be distinguished, and  in  Figure  1 it  is the  relative position  of each of  the curves with respect to the temperature  axis that makes possible a ranking of  the  alloys. Because the  curves for  each  of the  different alloys  collectively  make  up  a family,  the  determination of  a  single  point  in  the  inter­ mediate potential  range for each alloy would  be indicative of  the whole curve for  that  alloy  and consequently  define the relative resistance of each of the alloys.

A  simplified  screening  test, therefore appears  to  be available in which, at  a fixed  potential  in the  intermediate range,  the  temperature  of  the solution  is  increased  until ;:iitting is  observed.  This  technique  would  appear  to  take advantage of the fact that  an intermediate  potential,  such as +S00 mV (SCE), is common  to  all of the  alloys regardless of their  relative resistances with respect to temperature  and the  steep  slope  of  the  temperature-potential  curves would suggest  a well defined transition.

## Increasing Temperature  Screening  Test

In  this series of  experiments,  the  experimental  appara­ tus was the same as that  used in the previous investigation. 1 In  this  case, freshly  abraded  samples of  the  experimental alloys listed in Table  I  were exposed  in nitrogenated  3.5% (0.6M)  NaCl  pH3  solution  and  were  allowed  to  corrode freely for  five minutes, usually assuming a potential  of -365 to -370 mV (SCE). The potential  was then rapidly increased to  a  value of  +500  mV (SCE) and held  potentiostatically. After  a  five  minutes waiting  period, during  which  the current  density  decreased to  the  range  I  to  3 µA/cm 2 ,  the

*submitted for  publication July, 1972.

*Endako Mines  Ltd.,  Otawa, Ontario, Canada.

FIGURE 1 -Effect  of  Mo content and temperature on the potential  required to  initiate pitting based  on the criterion of a rise in current  density to  10 µA/cm 2 in a series  of  18% Cr, 20% Ni, 0.2% N stainless  steels.

<!-- image -->

temperature  of  the  solution was increased at the rate of 0.6 C per minute. The temperature  at which the current  density increased sharply to a value of  10 µA/ cm 2  (  the criterion  for pit initiation in Figure 1)  was  considered to be the temperature at  which  pitting  began  and  was  designated T  5 0 0 .  For each alloy, multiple  runs were carried out.

The  results  are  summarized  in  Table  2  in  terms  of minimum,  maximum,  and  average  T 5 0 0 values  and  are graphically  displayed  in Figure  2  with the  curves  from Figure  I.  Figure  2  clearly  demonstrates  the  power  of this technique  in quickly  and  easily screening a series of alloys for  relative  resistance  to  pitting.  The  excellent  correlation confirms  the  earlier  data  and  takes  advantage of  the  steep slope of the potential-temperature curves  in  describing relative  pitting resistance in terms  of a  temperature,  a parameter  with  possible design significance if the effects of testing rate can be taken into  account.

TABLE  1Chemical  Analyses  (Wt%)

| Alloy                                                            | Cr                            | Ni                            | Mn                               | C                                       | N                        | Si                             | D                            | s                          | Mo                                 |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------|
| 7580-1< 1 > 7580-2< 1 > 7580-3(l) 7580-4(l) 317L Alloy A Alloy B | 19.17 17.88 18-20 17.30 15-17 | 20.24 18.96 14.03 23.80 24-27 | 0.99 0.89 2.00< 2 > 1.72 2.00(2) | 0.030 0.030 0.030< 2 > 0.018 0.080< 2 > | 0.19 0.20 0.03 0.10-0.20 | 0.44 0.43 1.00< 2 0.44 1.00< 2 | 0.012 0.012 0,045< 2 > 0.010 | 0.012 0.013 0.030< 2 0.004 | 3.04 4.48 5.60 7.30 3.11 4.60 6.00 |

TABLE 2T5 00 Values (C) in 3.5% NaCl Solution at pH3

| Alloy   |   Number of Runs |   Minimum Tsoo |   Maximum Tsoo |   Average Tsoo |
|---------|------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| 7580-1  |                2 |           30   |           32   |           31   |
| 7580-2  |                3 |           39.5 |           43   |           41.5 |
| 7580-3  |                5 |           46   |           56   |           53   |
| 7580-4  |                2 |           60   |           62.5 |           61   |

## Effect  of Testing Rate

The two testing techniques compared above (increasing potential  at  fixed  temperature  and increasing temperature at  fixed  potential)  and  found  to  correlate  very  well are based  on  relatively  short  term  tests.  Although  it  appears that  they  can be used effectively as a screening test to rank the  pitting  susceptibility  of  a  series of  alloys, the  signifi­ cance of  these  data  with  respect to  long term  exposure is not  immediately clear. Leckie and Uhlig 2 have shown, for increasing potential runs  at  fixed  temperature, that the values of critical pitting potential are rate dependent, being more noble  at high scan rates for potentials  in the  general area  corresponding  to the lower  plateau  of  Figure 1. However, Bond and Lizlovs 3 found the potential for pitting to be more active at high scan rates, but  these results were obtained  at  generally more  noble  potentials  which  would correspond to the potential region near the upper plateau in Figure 1. On the  basis of these observations, extrapolation of the  curves  of Figure 1 to infinitely slow scan rates would result  in  an overall increase in slope toward  the vertical in the intermediate potential  range, brought  about  by further increases  in  high  potential values  and  decreases in  low values. No  lateral  shift with  respect to  temperature  would be expected in the intermediate potential range, nor are the upper  plateau  potential  values expected  to  change appre­ ciably in describing  infinitely slow scan rates (long exposure times). The  lower  plateau  potential  values will, of course, decrease with decreasing scan rate  as shown by  Leckie and Uhli 2 g.

·  Shape changes in Figure 1 of  the  type  proposed above would  indicate that long  term  pitting tests  should  be insensitive to  potential  over the  whole intermediate  poten­ tial range, but  very dependent  upon test temperature. Data produced at +500 mV  (SCE)  is  apparently near the postulated  point  of rotation  of the transition section of the curves and should therefore be applicable in predicting long term  pitting  behavior.  To  some extent  this  hypothesis  is substantiated  by  the  data  of  Figure  2  which  correlate  as well for  the  less resistant  alloys (short  exposure times) as for  the  more  resistant  alloys (  exposure  times approaching one hour).  Further  corroboration was obtained by means of a  series of  longer  exposures  carried  out  as a  function  of temperature in  a  solution  with oxidizing  power  in  the intermediate potential  range.

## FeC13 Exposure  Tests at Various Temperatures

Coupons  of  the  experimental  alloys were exposed  in 10% (0.6M)  FeCl 3 solution for  24 hours  at  a temperature of  27.5  C.  The  potential  of  this  solution,  measured  on bright  platinum,  was  +695  mV  (SCE)  and  the  pH  was approximately  1.  As  pointed  out  by  Bond  and  Lizlovs, 3 polarization  effects  result  in  a  somewhat lower  potential being  measured  on  the  corroding  sample, but  still within the intermediate  potential  range defined by Figure 1. After this  24 hour  exposure, coupons were examined visually to

FIGURE 2 -Comparison  of  increasing  potential w11111 fopei'D symbols) and increasing temper!llture (Tsoo) valun for 111 series of  18% Cr, 20% Ni, 0.2% N stainless  steels.

<!-- image -->

TABLE  3 -Results  of Exposure  Tests  in 10% FeCl 3 Solution

| Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   | Test TemperatureC   |
|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Alloy               | 27.5                | 30                  | 32.5                | 35                  | 37.5                | 40                  | 42.5                | 45                  | 47.5                | 50                  | 52.5                | 55                  | 57.5                | 60                  | 62.5                | 65                  |
| 7580-1              | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |
| 7580-2              | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |
| 7580-3              | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |
| 7590-4              | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   |
| 317L                | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |
| AlloyA              | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |
| Alloy8              | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | No                  | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   | +                   |

Note: + - Indicates  that pitting  was  observed  visually  after a 24 hour  exposure.

see whether pitting had occurred. Edge, end grain or crevice attack,  which occurred in some cases, was not  considered. The bath  temperature  was then  increased by 2.5 C and the coupon reimmersed for another  24 hours. This process was continued until pitting was observed.

The  chemical analyses of  the experimental alloys, as well  as  three  commercial  alloys,  317L,  Alloy  A,  and Alloy B, which  were  subjected  to  this  test,  are  given in Table  1  and  the  results  of  the  exposure  tests  at  various temperatures are summarized in Table 3.

## Discussion

The results of the FeCl3 exposure tests (Table 3) agree with the T 5 0 0 values  (Table 2) obtained for the same alloys in  a  solution  of  similar chloride  activity  and  pH, and  the T500 values were  shown to correlate with the  earlier data (Figure 2). It could be argued that  this agreement between shorter  and  longer term  tests,  one  potentiostatically  con­ trolled and the other freely corroding, is fortuitous. However,  such an agreement is to be expected if the pitting curves in  the  intermediate  potential range  of  Figure  1 approach  the vertical for  infinitely slow  scan  rates  as postulated above.

Experimental  confirmation  of  the  proposed  vertical temperature-potential  curves in  the  intermediate  potential region to describe infinitely slow scan rates was obtained by a series of  66 hour exposure experiments. Samples of 317L stainless steel were exposed  to  the  following solutions  of similar  chloride activities  but very  different oxidizing power:  16% sodium  hypochlorite  (domestic  bleach)  con­ taining 3.5% NaCl, 10% FeCh,  and 5% potassium ferricya­ nide containing 3.5%  NaCl.  In all  cases,  pitting was observed at  a  temperature  of  30 C or higher, but  not  at  a temperature of  27.5 C or lower. The strong dependence on temperature and not  on potential  suggests  that  there exists for  each  wholly  austenitic  steel  a critical pitting  tempera­ ture below  which  the steel will  not pit regardless  of potential  and  exposure  time.  The  data  presented here  are considered  to approximate such a parameter.

In Figure 3, this critical pitting temperature,  within the limits  of  accuracy  of  the techniques  described  here,  is plotted  as  a  function  of  the  Mo  content of  the  various steels, both  experimental  and  commercial. In  the  case of FeC1 3 exposure tests, the  low temperature  end of the error bars plotted  in  Figure 3 represents the  temperature  at  and below  which  pitting  was  not observed,  while  the  high temperature  end  indicates  the  temperature at  and  above

FIGURE  3 Critical pitting temperature (CPT) as a function of  molybdenum  content for  experimental  and  commercial stainless steels.

<!-- image -->

which  pitting  was  observed after  a 24 hour  exposure. The minimum  and  maximum  T5 00 values are  also plotted  in Figure 3 as error bars. In each case, these bars represent the degree  of  uncertainty in  determining  the  critical  pitting temperature by these techniques. The  average  pitting behavior of all the steels in the composition range 3 to 7.5% Mo can be described by the empirical equation

## Critical  Pitting  Temperature (C) = 10 + 7 x % Mo

Although the critical pitting  temperature  of a steel has been  obtained  in three  different  but  apparently  equivalent ways,  the  preferred  method  appears  to  be  by  the  use  of FeC1 3 exposures.  This  technique minimizes  testing  rate effects,  differentiates  between  pitting  and crevice and end grain attack,  uses samples of any geometry,  and requires a minimum  of  electronic  gadgetry.  Regardless of  the  tech­ nique  used,  however,  the  correlation  shown  in  Figure 3 appears to  be  a valid  and  workable way of describing the pitting  susceptibility of wholly austenitic alloys in terms of a parameter with design significance.

## Conclusions

The  pitting  characteristics  of  molybdenum  containing austenitic  stainless steel,  produced  in both  experimental  50 pound heats and on a commercial scale,  have been described by a single parameter,  the critical pitting  tempera­ ture,  which  depends  in  a regular way on the Mo content  of the steel. However,  these data are valid  only for pit nucleation  on a flat surface. Preliminary  results indicate  that these  temperature  values should be reduced  considerably  to describe the onset of edge or crevice attack, which consequently  appear  to  constitute a  more  likely  mode  of service  failure  than  pitting. This  area  is  presently under investigation.

## Acknowledgments

The  cooperation of  the  Physical  Metallurgy  Division,

Department of Energy,  Mines  and  Resources  in  making their  facilities  available and  helpful  discussions with  Dr. G. J.  Biefer (Head)  and  Dr.  J.B.  Gilmour (Research Scientist) of  the  Corrosion  Section,  Physical  Metallurgy Division, are gratefully  acknowledged.

## References

- l. R. J. Brigham. Pitting of Molybdenum Bearing Austenitic Stainless  Steel, Corrosion, 28,  177 (1972).
2.  H.  P.  Leckie  and  H. H.  Uhlig.  Environmental Factors  Affecting the Critical Potential for  Pitting in  18-8  Stainless Steel, J. Electrochern.  Soc., 113, 1262 (1966).
3.  A.  P.  Bond  and  E.  A.  Lizlovs.  Anodic  Polarization  of Austenitic Stainless Steels  in  Chloride Media, J.  Electrochern.  Soc., l 15, 1130  (1968).