## Effect  of  Alloying  Additions  on the Pitting Resistance of  18%  Cr Austenitic  Stainless Steel*

## R. J. BRIGHAM and E.  W. TOZER*

## Abstract

Using  temperature as a  pitting criterion, the  effects  of  Mo  and  other  supplementary alloying additions on  the pit initiation resistance  of  wholly austenitic stainless  steel  containing nominally 18%  Cr  have been evaluated.  Quantitative results  for Mo,  Cu,  Ni,  Mn,  N,  and  Si  alloy additions are  presented  and empirical relationships are given  which  describe  the  pitting resistance  of  several families  of  alloys.  Both experimental and commercial alloys  have been evaluated.

Austenitic  stainless steels containing nominally  18%  Cr, but with  wide  variations  in  the  amounts  of  alloyed  Mo, Si, N, Cu,  and  Mn have been  evaluated  for  resistance  to  pitting corrosion.  The evaluation  has been  based  on the parameter critical pitting  temperature (CPT),  the  temperature above which pitting  has been  observed to  occur  in  oxidizing acid chloride media and below  which the stainless  steel is immune  to  the  initiation  of  pits.  This CPT parameter  has been developed using the  excellent  correlation  between  pit initiation  conditions  determined  by  potentiostatically con­ trolled anodic  polarization scans  carried out at  various temperatures 1 and expostire  tests in oxidizing acid chloride media performed over the same temperature  range. 2

## Effect  of Potential on CPT

In  exposure  tests  to  oxidizing  acid  chloride  media  of different  oxidizing power and in anodic polarization  experi­ ments carried out  in  chloride  solutions  but  extrapolated  to infinitely  slow  scan  rates,  an  intermediate potential  range has been  observed 2 in which  the  CPT of an  alloy  does not vary  with  potential. An  example  of  this  type  of  behavior for  exposure  tests  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  These  go-no-go pitting data were obtained with 31  7L stainless steel (analysis  in Table 1  ), exposed for 24  hours in three solutions  of very different  oxidizing power  (potential)  but similar  chloride  activity.  The  relative  oxidizing  power  of each solution  has been  plotted  in Figure  1. For example, at 25 C (77  F),  the  steady  state  potentials  of 3  l 7L immersed in  the  ferric  chloride  and  potassium  ferricyanide  solutions relative to the saturated  calomel electrode  (SCE) were +660 m  V and  +440 m  V, respectively. The oxidizing power of the sodium hypochlorite  solution was assumed to be limited by transpassive  reactions to the value shown.

In  each  solution,  no  pitting  of  the  steel  was observed after exposure at 27  .5 C (82 F) but  in each case, pitting  was observed after  exposure  at  30  C (86  F)  as indicated  by the left and  right  ends  of the error  bars  in  Figure 1.  For convenience,  10% FeC1 3 solution  was chosen  as a  repre­ sentative test  solution for evaluation of pitting  resistance of stainless steels in terms of CPT.

*submitted for  publication July, 1973.

*Endako Mines,  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada Kl  A 0Gl.

FIGURE 1 -Pitting  temperature range of  317L  austenitic stainless  steel tested in chloride solutions of different oxidizing power  (potential) for 24 and  66 hours.  Dashed portion  of  the  curve  is  based on  potentiodynamic polariza­ tion  data. 1

<!-- image -->

## Effect  of  Chloride Concentration on CPT

In  Figure  2,  the  CPT values for two alloys, AISI Types 304 and 317L, are plotted as a function of FeC1 3 concentration  for  24  and  66  hour  exposure  tests.  Over the range  4  to  10% FeCl3 (which  includes  the  concentration 10% FeC1 3 -6H2 0 used  in  some laboratories),  the  CPT has been  found  to  be  independent  of chloride concentration  as shown.  For  chloride  concentrations  below  1  %, test times in excess  of  24  hours are  needed  to  exceed  the  incubation period  for  pit  initiation  as shown in Figure 2. However, the choice  of  10% FeC1 3 as testing  solution  facilitates  reliable results  in  a  test period  of  24  hours. Small variations  in FeC1 3 concentration from  batch  to batch  have no effect on CPT data.

TABLE  1 -Chemical  Analyses  (Wt%)

| Alloy   | Heat or AISI No.   | Cr          | Ni          | Mn         | C          | N          | Si        | p            | s            | Ci.n   | Mo        |
|---------|--------------------|-------------|-------------|------------|------------|------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|--------|-----------|
|         | 304                | 18.08       | 8.60        | <2         | 0.06       | NA         | <1        | <0.045       | <0.030       | NA     | 0.05      |
| 2       | 304                | 18-20       | 8-12        | <2         | <008       | NA         | <,        | <0.045       | <o.o3o       | NA     | NA        |
| 3       | 321                | 17-19       | 9-12        | <2         | <0.08      | NA         | <1        | <0.045       | <0.030       | NA     | 0.50      |
| 4       | 316L               | 16-18       | 12.33       | NA         | <0.03      | NA         | NA        | <0.045       | <0.030       | NA     | 2.47      |
| 5       | 8427-1             | 17.94       | 12.79       | 1.74       | 0.02       | 0.07       | 0.70      | 0.012        | 0.D12        | NA     | 2.60      |
| 6       | 8427-2             | 18.05       | 12.58       | 1.71       | 0.02       | 0.08       | 0.71      | 0.012        | 0.013        | NA     | 2.99      |
| 7       | 7579-1             | 19.32       | 20.46       | 0.99       | 0.02       | 0.06       | 0.50      | 0.010        | 0.015        | 0.02   | 3.07      |
| 8       | 317L               | 18 20       | 14.03       | <2         | <0.03      | NA         | <1        | < 0.045      | <:0.030      | NA     | 3.11      |
| 9       | 8427 3             | 17.8*       | 12.4'       | 1.7*       | 0.02*      | 0.07*      | 0.71 •    | 0.012*       | 0.01 3*      | NA     | 3.35      |
| 10      | 8427-4             | 17.62       | 12.51       | 1.66       | 0.02       | 0.07       | 0.71      | 0.012        | 0.013        | NA     | 3.85      |
| 11      | 7579-2             | 19.0*       | 19.5*       | 0.95*      | 0.02*      | 0.06*      | 0.50*     | 0.010*       | 0.015*       | 0.02·  | 4.56      |
| 12      | Gl 111             | 19.91       | 20.47       | 1.25       | 0.02       | 0.03       | 0.77      | 0.022        | 0.017        | NA     | 4.69      |
| 13      | 7579-3             | 18.0*       | 19.0*       | 0.95*      | 0.02·      | 0.06*      | 0.48*     | 0.011 •      | 0.015*       | 0.02·  | 6.18      |
| 14      | 7579-4             | 17.64       | 18.32       | 0.90       | 0.02       | 0.06       | 0.48      | 0.011        | 0.015        | 0.02   | 7.56      |
| 15      | 8428-1             | 18.5*       | 13.0'       | 1.7*       | 0.02*      | 0.23*      | 0.63*     | 0.013*       | 0.012*       | NA     | 2.42      |
| 16      | 8428-2             | 18.0*       | 12.8·       | 1.7.       | 0.02·      | 0.23*      | 0.63*     | 0.013•       | 0.012•       | NA     | 2.83      |
| 17      | 7580-1             | 19.17       | 20.24       | 0.99       | 0.03       | 0.19       | 0.44      | 0.012        | 0.012        | 0.01   | 3.04      |
| 18      | 8428-3             | 18.0*       | 12.5*       | 1.7•       | 0.02*      | 0.23*      | 0.63*     | 0.013•       | 0.012•       | NA     | 3.20      |
| 19      | 8428-4             | 17.76       | 12.30       | 1.66       | 0.02       | 0.23       | 0.63      | 0.D13        | 0.012        | NA     | 3.55      |
| 20      | 75802              | 19.0*       | 20.0*       | 0.96*      | 0.03'      | 0.20*      | 0.44*     | 0.012*       | 0.012•       | 0.01 • | 4.48      |
| 21      | 7580-3             | 18.0*       | 19.0*       | 0.93*      | 0.03*      | 0.20*      | 0.44*     | 0.012*       | 0.012*       | 0.02·  | 5.60      |
| 22      | Alloy B            | 15-17       | 24-27       | <20        | <o.08      | 0.10-0.20  | <1.0      | NA           | NA           | NA     | 6.0       |
| 23      | 7580-4             | 17.88       | 18.96       | 0.89       | 0.03       | 0.20       | 0.43      | 0.012        | 0.013        | 0.02   | 7.30      |
| 24      | 7581 1             | 18.37       | 20.17       | 1.02       | 0.02       | 0.06       | 0.53      | 0.013        | 0.013        | 1.92   | 3.06      |
| 25      | 7581-2             | 18.0*       | 20.0·       | 1.0*       | 0.02*      | 0.06'      | 0.53*     | 0.013•       | 0.013•       | 1.9*   | 4.43      |
| 26      | Alloy C            | 18.8        | 24.86       | 1.64       | 0.018      | 0.032      | 0.44      | 0.016        | 0.005        | 1.32   | 4.33      |
| 27      | Alloy A            | 17.3        | 23.8        | 1.72       | 0.018      | 0.034      | 0.44      | 0.010        | 0.004        | NA     | 4.60      |
| 29      | 7582-1             | 19.10       | 20.18       | 1.08       | 0.02       | 0.05       | 1.52      | 0.012        | 0.01:4       | 0.05   | 3.00      |
| 30      | 7582-2             | 19.0*       | 20.0·       | 1.0*       | 0.02•      | 0.05'      | 1.5 *     | 0.012*       | 0.014*       | 0.05*  | 4.35      |
|         |                    |             |             |            |            | 0.07       | 0.71      |              |              |        |           |
| 31      | 8429-1             | 17.95       | 12.71       | 0.53       | 0.03       |            |           | 0.012        | 0.012        | NA     | 2.50      |
| 32 33   | 8429-2 8430-2      | 17.9* 17.74 | 12.6* 12.63 | 0.53' 0.46 | 0.03* 0.03 | 0.01· 0.23 | 0.7* 0.58 | 0.012* 0.013 | 0.012· 0.014 | NA NA  | 2.75 2.85 |
| 34      | 8430-3             | 17.5*       | 12.5*       | 0.46'      | 0.03*      | 0.23*      | 0.57*     | 0.01 3*      | 0.014•       | NA     | 3.26      |
|         |                    |             | 22.68       |            | 0.04       |            |           |              | 0.014        | NA     | 6.04      |
| 35 36   | 8426 7995          | 19.38 18.67 | 23.8        | 0.38 0.46  | 0.043      | 0.20 0.224 | 0.47 0.33 | 0.014 0.013  | 0.008        | NA     | 6.3       |

## NOTES:

1. Alloys 1,  2,  :l,  4,  8,  22,  26,  :rnd  27  are  commercially available alloys.
2. Alloy 12 was  an  experimental 500  pound heat.
3. The  other alloys  were  produced as  splits  from 50  pound heats.
4. Experimental alloys  were  deoxidized with Al  (up  to  2  pounds/ton).
5.  NA~ Not  analyzed but no  intentional addition.
6. ·~Not analyzed but  extrapolated from  values  for  other splits  of  the  same  heat  which  were  analyzed.

## Effect  of Alloy  Additions  on  Pitting  Resistance

## Alloys

A number  of  wholly  austenitic stainless  steels  contain­ ing  nominally 18% Cr  and  systematic variations in  other alloying  additions were  evaluated. The  grid  of  alloys  with compositions  given in Table  I  include  both  commercial  and experimental  alloys.

Experimental alloys  were  melted from  virgin  materials in  either  50  or  500  pound  heats.  The  50 pound  heats  were poured  as  four  12 pound  splits  containing increases  in  Mo concentration. All experimental alloys were deoxidized with Al  up to 2  pounds/ton of  metal. The  ingots  were cropped, conditioned by  grinding  and  hot rolled  to  sheet.

All  of the alloys  were  tested in  the  single  phase  quench annealed condition. The  surface  finish  of  all  the  stainless steel  coupons tested for  pitting  resistance  was  prepared  by abrading  with  120 grit  silicon  carbide  paper.

## Testing

As  discussed above, the  CPT  parameter is  an  easily determinable and  reliable  criterion with  which  to  evaluate quantitatively the  effect  of  alloy  chemistry changes  on the resistance of  stainless  steels  to  pit  initiation. The  insensi­ tivity of  CPT  to  such  variables  as potential, test  time,  and chloride concentration facilitates  quantitative comparisons with  data  by  other  investigators 3  , 4 who  have  used  slightly different  values of  the  variables.

FIGURE 2 -Critical  pitting  temperature  of  304 and 317L stainless  steels  as a function  of  FeCl3 concentration  in 24  and 66  hour tests.

<!-- image -->

The. CPT for  a particular  alloy can be determined  most readily  by  a series of  24  hour  isothermal  exposure  tests  in I  0% FeC1 3 .  The  metal  coupon  is placed  on  a  layer of glass beads at the  bottom  of an open  flask containing  a minimum of  IO ml  of  I  0% FeC1 3 solution  for each square centimeter of  coupon  surface.  The  temperature of  the  test  solution  is increased  in  2.5  C  steps  every  24  hours until pitting is observed on  the  flat  surface  parallel  to  the  rolling plane  of the  immersed  coupon at  the  end  of  one  such  exposure period.  For  high  temperature exposure  tests.  the  flask  is equipped  with a  reflux condenser. For  low  temperature exposure tests (below ambient), it is  essential that the coupon  be chilled to  the  test  temperature  before  immersion in order to  obtain  reliable results.

At  the  conclusion  of  any  24  hour  test  at  a particular temperature, the  CPT  is  shown  to  have  been  exceeded  if localized  attack  has  occurred  on  the  surface  parallel  to  the rolling  plane  as  discrete  pits,  well  removed  from  and  not connected  to the  edges or other  surfaces. These discrete  pits are invariably  capped,  and contain  greenish colored  electro­ lyte.  They  are  easily  visible to  the  naked  eye,  particularly after  probing  the  surface  with  a  needle.  In all but  the  most resistant alloys,  they are  macroscopic (at least  I  mm  in diameter)  after  24  hours.  At  temperatures below  the  CPT edge, end-grain,  or  crevice attack  may be extensive,  but  the test is  considered a  no-go  with respect to  pitting unless discrete pits which are not connected to these other localized  corrosion  phenomena  exist  on  the  rolling surface. Preliminary  results  have  shown  that  there  exists  a tempera­ ture  below  which  no  attack of  any  form  will occur.  This temperature, called  the crevice  corrosion temperature, is less than  CPT for any steel.

## Results

Molybdenum  has  been  found  1  , 2  ,s  to  play  a  primary

FIGURE 3 -Critical  pitting  temperature as a  function of molybdenum  content  for  an average family  of  18%  Cr,  low nitrogen,  experimental  and commercial  stainless  steels  which are  representative  of steels  made  by present  commercial practice.  Unbracketed  numbers refer  to  alloys listed in Table 1. Bracketed numbers refer to  data cited  in the literature.

<!-- image -->

role  in  increasing  resistance  to  pitting  and  consequently  has been  used  throughout as  the  ordinate  in  plotting CPT for the  alloys.

## Effect  of Mo(vbde11u111

In Figure  3,  the  CPT  values  for  a  number of  com­ mercial and experimental stainless steels  . containing nominally 18% Cr,  9  to  20% Ni,  0.9  to 1.8% Mn, 0.5  to 0.7% Si, and  low  Cu and N values, are plotted  as a function of  their  molybdenum contents.  The  unbracketed numbers in this and subsequent  figures are used to  identify  the  alloys listed  in  Table  1. The bracketed  numbers  have been used to identify the  reference  for  data taken  from  the  literature. Over  the  range O to  7  .5% Mo,  the  behavior  of  all of  these wholly austenitic steels is  adequately described by the empirical  relationship

## CPT (C) = 5 + 7 x % Mo

as  shown. These  steels  are  representative of  present-day commercial  practice,  and  therefore this  line  describes  the average family  of 18% Cr  austenitic stainless  steels  with which  other  alloys  of different  chemistry  can be compared. At  temperatures to the left of  this  line,  pitting  was  not observed for this family of steels. On  the other hand, exposures  at  temperatures higher  than  (to  the  right of)  the empirical line resulted  in the  formation  of pits.

Bond  and  Lizlovs 3 and Tomashov et al, 4 testing within the  range  of  FeCh (4  to  10%) shown  to  provide  tempera: ture independent results in Figure 2, found go-no-go pitting behavior for austenitic stainless steel alloys of increasing  Mo  content (but  similar  in  composition to  the alloys  described  here)  at  fixed  temperatures near  ambient. Their  results  (vertical  error  bars)  are plotted  in Figure 3. In

FIGURE 4  Critical pitting temperature as  a  function of molybdenum  content  for a family  of  18%  Cr,  0.2%  nitrogen austenitic  stainless steels. The  numbers refer  to  alloys listed in Table 1.

<!-- image -->

each  case, the  alloy  containing  the  lower Mo concentration pitted  while  the  higher  Mo alloy  (top  of error  bar)  was not attacked.

## Effect  of Nitrogen

In  Figure  4,  the  pitting  resistance  of  another  family  of wholly  austenitic  alloys containing  higher  nitrogen  (0.2% as opposed  to  0.06%)  is presented.  These  alloys  are similar to the average family of alloys discussed above in other respects. The behavior of this family of alloys can  be described by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  addition  of  nitrogen  has increased  the  resistance  of the alloys  by  approximately 5  C  (9  F)  at  every  Mo  level.  In addition  to  this  effect,  nitrogen  has  been  shown  earlier 5 to play  an  important role  in  maintaining the alloys  in  the single phase austenitic  condition.

## Effect  of  Copper

In Figure  5,  the  behavior  of  two  alloys,  numbers  24 and  25,  each  containing  approximately 2% Cu, is compared with the response  of  the average  family  of  alloys  which contain  no  copper  and  which have been  described  as shown in Figure 3 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  addition  of  2% Cu has had  no measurable  effect  on the pit  initiation resistance  of  alloys  of  this  type,  and  the  CPT values  of alloys 24 and  25  coincide with those of  the average family.  Two  other alloys,  numbers  26,  containing 1.32% Cu,  and  27,  containing only  residual  levels  of  Cu,

~

FIGURE 5 -Critical  pitting  temperature  as a  function of molybdenum  content  for three families of austenitic stainless steels  showing  the effect of increasing  Si content. The numbers refer  to  alloys  listed in  Table  1,  Alloys  24,  25,  i!lnd 26  contain  alloyed  Cu  but  fall  in  the  same families  as other similar steels  which  do not contain Cu.

<!-- image -->

have  CPT values which  place  them  both  in  another  family. Again  no  effect of  copper can  be  observed  although  both alloys  exhibit slightly  higher  resistance  than  expected on the  basis of  Figure  3. These commercial  low nitrogen  alloys, with and  without Cu  additions, exhibit pitting resistance similar  to  the  nitrogen  family  shown  in  Figure 4 described by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Effect  of Silicon

The  alloys  discussed  above, numbers  I  to  27 (including the  average  family),  contain approximately 0.6%  Si.  Two higher  Si alloys  (1.5%  Si)  are  shown  in Figure  5 also. Their behavior  can be described  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  increase in  CPT  of 10  C  (18  F)  above  that for  the average family,  which  differs  only  in  Si content,  is additive over the  Mo range investigated  and  agrees qualitatively  with the results  found  by  Tomashov et al 4 for  austenitic  stainless steels with  increasing Si contents.

## !::.,ffect of Manganese

All  of the steels  discussed  above  (numbers l  to  30) have contained  Mn in  the  approximate  range  1 to  2% (AISI specifies  2% Mn maximum  for 304,  316,  and 3 l 7L stainless steels). The  results  for  a  family  of  alloys  with  lower  Mn (&lt;0.5%) are  plotted in  Figure  6.  In  this  case,  a large  and synergistic  improvement  in resistance  relative  to  the average

FIGURE 6 -Critical  pitting  temperature  as a  function of molybdenum content for a family of low (&lt;D.5%) Mn stainless  steels  which exhibit  superior pit  initiation  resistance. The numbers refer to alloys listed in Table  1.

<!-- image -->

family has been found  when low Mn is used in combination with increasing Mo and the behavior is described  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

h:ffect of Nickel

The alloys in any one family investigated have varied in Ni content  by  as much  as  11  % (from  9  to  20%), but  in all cases, the  alloys have been wholly austenitic.  Although  Ni is an  important  additive  for  stabilizing  the  austenite  phase, it has been  found  to  have no  measurable  effect  on  resistance to  pit  initiation  in alloys already completely  austenitic.  For example,  alloy  6  (12.58%  Ni)  and  alloy  7  (20.46%  Ni), which differ substantially  only in Ni content,  have the same CPT values.  The  occurrence  of  second  phase (a or a) has been shown  previously 5 to  limit  the  resistance  of  alloys of the type  discussed here.

## Summary of Results

Using temperature as  the  pitting criterion,  the  pitting resistance of  austenitic  stainless steels containing O to  7  .5% Mo has been quantitatively  evaluated.  As a result,  the broad behavior trends  of whole families of alloys can be described by  simple  empirical  relationships  as shown  in  Figures  3  to 6.  In  all  cases,  Mo  additions  have  exerted  the  dominant beneficial  effect  which  increases  linearly  with  Mo content when  the  pitting  resistance  is  stated  in  terms  of  the  CPT parameter.  The  data  in  Figure 3 are representative  of alloys manufactured by present practice, and  in  this case  the monotonic  relationship  between  % Mo  and  CPT has been confirmed  over  the  whole  Mo  and  temperature range  of interest.  These  data  demonstrate quantitatively the  bene­ ficial  effect of  Mo  additions which  is  qualitatively well known.

The  addition  of  Cu,  Ni,  N,  or  Si to  the  average family has  not  been  observed  to  have  any effect  on  the  slope  of the  CPT  vs  %  Mo  curve,  although  the  intercept may  be changed.  On  the  other  hand,  with  low (&lt;0.5%)  Mn levels, the  beneficial  effect  of  Mo  has  been  enhanced  as demon­ strated  by  the  change  in  slope  of the CPT vs% Mo curve in the  direction of  increased  resistance  at  any  Mo level. The beneficial effect of low Mn  levels  has been observed previously in the case of resulfurized steel, 6 and the difference  in behavior  apparently  results  from the presence of  different sulfide  phases  in  equilibrium with  alloys  of different  Mn content.  Unfortunately, Mn concentrations  in the range 0.5 to 2%,  the range  which includes most commercial  alloys,  result  in  steels  with  less than  optimum pitting  resistance.

## Discussion

In this presentation, the effects of  many of the common  supplementary alloying additions to austenitic stainless  steel  have  been summarized. Using  these  data, accurate  predictions of  the  pitting  resistance  of  any  steel should be possible, provided that the steel is  wholly austenitic  and  falls within  the  composition  ranges discussed here.  As an example,  the  sixteen  austenitic  steels evaluated by  Degerbeck 7 can  be  assigned CPT values based  on  their compositions using  the  empirical  relationships  above.  On the  basis  of  these  inferred  CPT values, seven of  the  alloys had  CPTs higher  than  the  test  temperature  and should have been  resistant to pitting in  10%·  FeC1 3 solution. In  fact, Degerbeck,  using the  same criterion  of  discrete  pits  on  the rolling surface  as used here,  found  that  five of  these alloys were  resistant to pit initiation in  this solution. Of  the remaining two, for whi.Gh inferred CPT  values  do not correspond  with  the  results  obtained, at  least  one  can be suspected on  the basis  of  chemistry of  containing  some second  phase,  a  condition which  has  been  shown  to  limit the pitting  resistance  of all.oys. 5

The  relationship  between  the  results obtained  using the CPT  parameter and results from  other laboratory tech­ niques  and  field  tests  deserve comment.  First,  it  should  be emphasized  that the  CPT  parameter has  been  shown  to correlate  exactly  with  pitting  potential results  obtained  by potentiodynamic anodic  polarization  curves when the latter are carried out over  a  sufficient temperature range  and extrapolated to  slow  scan  rates. 2 No  inconsistencies  have been observed  in  the results  from  these two  laboratory tests.  On  the  other  hand, conclusive field  test  data  on  pit initiation conditions which  are  not  partially  obscured  by the  onset  of  crevice corrosion  are  not  available with which to  test  CPT data.  However,  qualitative  comparisons  can be made.  For  example,  Kugler et  al, 8 who  exposed  18% Cr austenitic stainless steels (compositions similar to the average  family  shown  in  Figure  3)  in  sea  water  (chloride activity  comparable  to  10% FeC1 3 ) at  Heligoland  for  three years,  found  that  a  steel  containing  2.93% Mo was readily attacked while  a  similar  alloy  containing  3.29%  Mo was unpitted although  it  suffered  crevice corrosion.  Assuming a maximum ambient temperature of 20 C  (68 F),  these go-no-go  points are  close to the CPT  line  in  Figure  3. Certainly  the  data  in  Figure  3,  obtained  with  10% FeCh

exposures, would  not be  expected to  underestimate the aggressiveness  of  sea  water with  respect to  pit initiation. Alloy  number  20 in Table  1 [CPT in the range 40  to 42.5  C (104 to 109 F)] has been unattacked after one year exposure in I  0% FeC'3 solution in the laboratory at ambient temperatures as  high  as  35  C  (95 F),  and  would not  be expected  to fail by  pitting  in sea water  limited  to the same  temperature. However,  crevice  corrosion  would  con­ tinue  to  be  a  possible failure  mechanism  for  this  stainless steel  at  much  lower  temperatures and  this  form  of localized corrosive attack is presently under investigation using techniques  similar to those  described  here.

## Conclusions

- I.  The  CPT parameter  has  been  used  to define  quanti­ tatively  the  pitting resistance  of  several  families  of  austen­ itic  stainless  steels  containing  Mo  and  other  supplementary alloying elements.
2.  Molybdenum  additions  in  the- range Oto  7.5% exert a  dominant and progressive beneficial role in  providing resistance  to  pit  initiation in  all  of  the  steels  studied  but particularly in  steels  of  lower  (&lt;0.5%)  Mn content. Other alloying  additions  have  no effect  (Cu and  Ni) or an additive beneficial effect  (N and Si).
3.  Correlations between CPT  data and results  from other laboratory tests and field exposures have been discussed in cases  where crevice corrosion, a  form of localized  attack which  is  operative to  temperatures lower than  CPT, does not  obscure  observation  of pit  initiation.

## Acknowledgmenilts

The  cooperation of  the  Physical  Metallurgy  Division, Department of Energy, Mines  and Resources in  making their  fadlities available  to  us  and  helpful  discussions  with Drs.  G. J. Biefer  (Head) and J. 1:3.  Gilmour (Research Scientist) of the Corrosion Sedion. Physical  Metallurgy Division, are gratefully  acknowledged.

## References

- I. R.  J.  Brigham.  Pitting  of  Molybdenum Bearing  Stainless  Steel, Corrosion, 28,  177 (1972).
2. R. J. Brigham and F. W.  Tozer. Temperature as  a Pilling Criterion, Corrosion, 29,  33  (I 973).
3. A. P.  Bond  and  E.  A.  Lizlovs.  Anodic  l'oklriz;ition of  Austenitk Steels in Chloride Medi.i,  ./. Hil'ctroch1·1n.  Soc., 115, 1130 (1968).
4. N.  D. Tomashov,  G.  P. Chernova,  and  0.  N.  Man:ova.  Effed of Supplement.iry Alloying  Elements  on  Pitting  Corrosion  Suscepti­ bility of 18Cr-14Ni  Stainless  Steel, Corrosion. 20,  1661 (1964).
- S.  R.  J. Brigham  and E.  W.  Tozer. Effcd of  Microstructurc on Pitting of Stainless Steel, Ca11adia11 Met. Quarterly, Il 2, 171 ( 1973).
6. M. Henthorne.  Corrosion  of  Resulphurized Free-Machining Stain­ less Steel, Corrosion, 26,  511  (1970).
7. J. Degerbcck. On Accelerated Pitting and Crevice  Corrosion Tests, J. Hlectrochern.  Soc., 120,  175 (1973)
8.  Von  A.  Kugler, K. Bohnenkamp, G.  Lennanz, and  K.  Schafer. Einfluss des Molybdiingehaltes nichtrostender austenitisi;her Stahle  auf  die  Korrosionsbestandigkeit in  Seewasser  bei  Natur­ versuchen  auf  Helgoland, Stahl  u.  Eisen, 92,  l 026  ( 1972).