<!-- image -->

## Thank you for using our service!

Interlibrary Services The Ohio State University Libraries (614)292-9077 osuill@osu.edu

Article Express documents are delivered 24/7 directly to your ILLiad account from scanning libraries around the world.  If there is a problem with a PDF you receive, please contact our office so we might report it to the scanning location for resolution.

## NOTICE WARNING CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS

The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United States Code) governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted material.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction.  One of these specified conditions is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be 'used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.' If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of 'fair use,' that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of the order would involve violation of copyright law.

01

<!-- image -->

## LINDA HALL LIBRARY 5109 CHERRY STREET

## I  llllll  111111111111111 111111111111111111

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

KANSAS CITY, MISSOURI

64110-2498

PHONE

(816) 363-4600

FAX:

(816) 926-8785

## SHIP TO:

Interlibrary Services Ohio State University Libraries 1858 Neil Avenue Mall Columbus, Ohio  43210 United  States

osu Patron:

Odyssey:  206.107.43.112

Phone:

Ariel:  E: osuill@osu.edu

## Regular

FedEx 3Day

CCL

Max Cost:  65.00IFM

Notes: Borrowing  Notes:  SHARES

Member;  **Please scan image pages in

color or grayscale**

3/22/18DocServ  #: 797347

Location:

Title: Stainless steels '91 : International Conference on Stainless Steels, June 10-13, 1991, Nippon Convention Center, Chiba, Japan: proceedings.

Volume:

Issue:

Date:

1991

S. Azuma et al.

Article/Paper:

Pages:

133-

Tokyo, Japan:  Iron and Steel Institute of Japan, 1991

OCLC #:

35495514

ISSN:

Lender string: *LHL,CAI

IL: 186698988

15:54

Shelved as: csa materials TA479 .S7S76 1991

<!-- image -->

1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111

## OCLC

<!-- image -->

CORROSION RESISTANCE OF  28i, DUPLEX STAINLESS STEEL  TUBE

. .-J'.N HOT  SEAWATER APPLICATIONSv

Shigeki Azuma*, Kazuhiro  Ogawa*, Hi:deaki  Miyuki  *, Takeo Kudo* and M}cltio Nishi**

Sumitomo Metal  Industries, Ltd. *  Iron &amp; SteeTltesearch Laboratories, Amagasaki,  Japan **  Specialty Tubing  Technology  Section, Head Office, Tokyo,  Japan

Synopsis: A new duplex  stainless steel containing 28~~and 3.8%~ 1 was  developed. The  tube of the duplex stainless steel was manufactured by  a  powder  metallurgical process which  was introduced to avoid the s-~-embli ttlement of the billet. The  developed steel was superior to a conventional 25~r duplex stainless steel and equal I to super-ferri tic or super-austenitic stainless steels on  the resistance to pitting and  crevice corrosion in hot seawater environments. Further, the corrosion resistance of the weldment  was  investigated and  the effect of the welding procedure was  clarified. Consequently, the developed steel was  considered to be  suitable for hot seawater applications such  as  heat exchanger tube. A

\bl{ ./\  I\ ~,. Key words: duplex stainless steel, super-stainless steel, powder  metallurgy, pitting corrosion, crevice corrosion, seawater, heat exchanger tube

## 1. Introduction

Ferritic-austenitic duplex stainless steels(SSs) have been used as the tubular products in  chemical industries, for example,  heat exchanger tubes and  various pipings [1]­ [3]. They are superior to ferritic SSs  in  toughness and  weldability, and  to austenitic SSs in stress corrosion cracking resistance. Duplex  SSs  have  another advantage over austenitic SSs  in cost saving, because they need less Ni  content than austenitic SSs  when  their contents of Cr  and  Mo are increased for improving the corrosion resistance. For this reason, duplex SSs  of high Cr  and  Mo contents have been applied to severely corrosive environments as  a  substitute for expensive austenitic SSs.

Recently, ferri tic and austeni tic SSs  which are called 'super-SSs' have been developed for the application in the highly corrosive environments containing chloride ion such as seawater [4]-[8]. They  contain more  Cr, Mo (and  N  for super-austenitic SSs) as alloying elements than conventional SSs  to improve  the corrosion resistance. On the other hand  the commercial  duplex  SSs, in general, contain less Cr  and  Mo than the super-SSs, and do  not always  have  enough  corrosion resistance on  the hot seawater application [3]. It is thought to  be  worthwhile to  develop a  super-duplex SS which  contains high Cr  and  Mo and  has the corrosion resistance equal to super-ferritic and  austenitic SSs[9]. As for duplex SSs, however, the increase in the Cr  and  Mo contents for improving the corrosion resistance accelerates the sigma  phase  precipitation to  bring the embrittlement of the billet on  tube making process. This is the reason why  the super-duplex SS  has been difficult to manufacture by  the conventional process.

In this report a  new duplex SS  containing 28%Cr and  3.8%Mo  is introduced which  has been developed by  applying a  powder  metallurgical method  by  which  the sigma-embrittlement of the billet can  be  avoided. The  corrosion resistance of the developed steel including its weldment  is also presented on  the application in  hot seawater environment.

## 2. Development  of  28%Cr  duplex  stainless steel

## 2-1. Background

The  addition of Cr  and Mo is necessary to improve  the resistance to the localized corrosion by  chloride attack. When a  index, which is called pitting index(P. I.) and calculated by  (%Cr) + 3(%Mo)  + 10(%N), is introduced to estimate the resistance to pitting corrosion of SSs, some typical super-SSs proves to have  the P. I. value over 40  [5],[10]. On the other hand  the conventional duplex  SS containing 25%Cr  and  3%Mo only  have  the P. I. value around  36. Therefore a  super-duplex SS with  the corrosion resistance equal to super­ ferritic and  austenitic SSs  .is  necessary to con  ta.in much higher contents of Cr  and Mo. However the duplex SS  tube of higher Cr  and Mo contents cannot be easily manufactured by the usual process because the s.igma-emblittlement of the billet becomes a serious problem.

To  avoid the s.igma-embl.ittlement problem a powder metallurgical (PIM) technique was introduced to the tube manufacturing process. In the P/M process the billet consists of the powder which  .is  packed  in  a  steel capsule and consequently no  s.igma-embl.ittlement occurs.

## 2-2. Alloy design

The  optimum chemical composition of the super-duplex SS  of h.igh  Cr  and Mo contents was  investigated. At  first the basic compo­ sition of 27. 5%Cr and 3. 8%Mo  was selected from the viewpoint of necessary corrosion resistance mentioned above, namely P. I. value higher than 40, and  the balance in Cr and Mo contents. The  weldment performance was  .investigated on  the 27.5%Cr-3.8%Mo  alloys containing various amounts  of Ni  and  N  shown in  Table 1  to clarify the optimum contents of those elements.

The  weldment performance was  investi­ gated on  the toughness and  the pitting re­ sistance at their heat affected zone(HAZ). The  welded joints were produced employing multipass gas tungsten arc welding(GTAW)  with the welding conditions shown in Fig. 1. The toughness was  evaluated by  the Charpy  impact test at 273K  (  o· C)  using a specimen  with a  V notch at the position 2mm  distant from  the fusion line where the absorbed energy was most decreased. The  pitting corrosion re­ sistance was  evaluated by  the pitting poten­ tial(Vc') of the simulated HAZ  specimen  which was  affected by  the thermal cycle with the peak temperature of 1648K(1375'C) shown  in Fig. 2. The  pitting potential was  measured by  the potential sweep  method  at the rate of 20mV/min  in synthetic seawater at 353K(80'  C).

Fig. 3  shows the effect of the Ni  and  N contents on  the Charpy  impact values of the weldment. The  N  content was  found to make little influence on  the toughness. The  Ni content, on  the other hand, remarkably af­ fected the toughness. The impact value showed the  maximum  value at about 7% Ni. The mechanism  of the toughness deterioration at the HAZ  was  clarified by transmission elec-

Table  1  Chemical  compositions of  materi­ als used  for alloy design

| C            | Si    | Mn        | Ni     |   Cr |   Mo | N        |
|--------------|-------|-----------|--------|------|------|----------|
| 0.003 1J.ol3 | ~ 0.7 | 1,),: 1.6 | 2> 9.9 |   28 |    4 | ~~~ 0.36 |

<!-- image -->

Fig .1 Welded  joint for evaluation of HAZ  emblittlement

Fig.2 Thermal cycle applied to ed  HAZ  specimen simulat-

<!-- image -->

Fig.3 Effect of Ni  and  N content on  HAZ toughness at  273K

<!-- image -->

Fig.  4 Effect of N  content on pl ttlng potential of  simulated HAZ  speci­ men in  synthetic seawater at  353K

<!-- image -->

Fig.  5  Optimum  Ni and N  content range determined by  HAZ  performance

<!-- image -->

tron microscopic(TEM)  observation [11]. It was  caused by  the Cr  carbo-nitride precipita­ tion in the lower Ni  region and  by  the sigma  phase precipitation in the higher Ni one. Fig. 4  shows  the effect of  N content on  the pitting potential of the simulated RAZ of alloys containing 6  to  8%Ni. The pitting potential reached 0.6V  with the 0.3%N addition. It was  confirmed that the addition of N was  beneficial to improve  the pitting corrosion resistance as  has  been  reported in  references [12] ,[13].

The  effect of  Ni  and  N contents on  the  HAZ  performance is summarized  in  Fig. 5. From the viewpoint of the HAZ  performance the optimum contents of Ni  and  N were  found  to  be  7% and  0.3%,  respectively. Consequently, The principal composition of the super-duplex SS was decided to  be  27.5%Cr-7%Ni-3.8%Mo-0.3%N.

## 2-3. Tube manufacturing

The  seamless tube of the 28%Cr duplex SS with the optimum chemical composition was manufactured through the P/M process shown in  Fig. 6  [14]. The  duplex SS powder  was  atom­ ized by  nitrogen gas  and  packed  into a  mild steel capsule. The powder billet was  processed by  cold isostatic pressing(CIP) and  hot  extruded to the tube. The  tube  was  acid pickled in order to remove  the capsule and  then heat treated at 1373K(llOO"C) followed by  water quenching.

## 3. Corrosion resistance of  developed steel

## 3-1. Corrosion resistance of  base  metal

## The materials used  are shown in  Table

2. The  28%Cr duplex SS  was  the seamless tube mentioned  above. The  other materials were  conventional 25%Cr  duplex SS(25Cr,  JIS SUS329J2L, UNS  S31250), super-ferritic SS  (2942, UNS S44800)  and super-austenitic SS  (  254, UNS S31254) . The  28%Cr duplex SS and  the two  super-SSs have  nearly the same P. I. value higher than 40. The  pitting potential of the materials was  measured  in synthetic seawater at various temperature by  the potential sweep  method  at the rate of  20  mV/min. The  crevice corrosion poten­ tial was  measured using the specimen  with metal/metal crevice in the same  manner  as the pitting potential measurement. Immer­ sion test was  carried out in natural sea-

Fig.6 P/M process for tube manufactur­ ing

<!-- image -->

| Inert gas atomization        |
|------------------------------|
| Packing in capsule           |
| Cold isostatic pressing      |
| Hot extrusion                |
| Capsule removing by pickling |

Table 2  Principal compositions of mate­ rials tested

| Steels   |   Cr | Ni   |   Mo | N    |   p. I. |
|----------|------|------|------|------|---------|
| 28Cr     | 27.3 | 7.3  |  3.8 | 0.31 |    41.7 |
| 2942     | 28.4 | 2.6  |  4.2 | -    |    41   |
| 254      | 19.8 | 18.6 |  6.4 | 0.20 |    41   |
| 329J2L   | 25.2 | 7. 1 |  3   | 0.14 |    35.6 |

water at 308K(35' C)  for 6  months using a multiple crevice type specimen  according to A8TM  G78.

The effect of temperature on the pitting potential was  clarified as  shown in Fig. 7. The  28%Cr duplex 88  marked  much higher pitting potential than the conven­ tional 25%Cr duplex  88  as is expected from the difference in their P. I. values. The pitting resistance of the 28%Cr duplex  was equal to that of the super-austenitic super 88  and  superior to the super-ferritic 88  as can  be seen in the pitting potential at 373K(100'  C).

Crevice corrosion is more  important problem than pitting corrosion for 88s because the former occurs more  frequently than the latter in chloride containing environments such  as  seawater. The  crevice corrosion potential of the all materials became  less noble than the pitting poten­ tial at the same  temperature as shown  in Fig. 8. The results obtained at 353K(80'  C) gave the following rank on the crevice corrosion resistance: 25%Cr duplex 88 &lt; super-austenitic 88(254) &lt;  28%Cr duplex 88 &lt; super-ferritic 88(2942) which indicates that the ferri tic 88  is more  resistant to crevice corrosion than the austenitic one even  with the same P. I. value in contrast to the .pitting corrosion resistance shown in Fig. 8 [5], [15]. Fig. 9 shows  the effect of temperature and  chloride concen­ tration on  the crevice corrosion behavior of the alloys by the constant potential test at O.  4V  in NaCl  solutions for 48h. The  difference in the critical chloride concentration among the alloys was  consist­ ent  with the rank  obtained from  the crevice corrosion potential in Fig. 8. The  28%Cr duplex 88  and the super-ferritic 88  were the most resistant to crevice corrosion. The 28%Cr  duplex  88  showed a  good  corrosion resistance in the immersion test for 6 months  in the actual seawater; it suffered no  crevice corrosion.

## 3-2. Corrosion resistance of  weldment

The corrosion resistance of the weldment  is important for duplex 88s. It has been reported that the corrosion re­ sistance of duplex 88s is deteriorated by the microstructure change  and  the precipi­ tation of carbo-nitride and intermetallic compound  at the weldment [11],[12],[16]. Fig. 10  shows  the ferrite content and  the pitting potential of the 25%Cr and the 28%Cr duplex 88s after heat treatment for 10s  at various temperature. The  ferrite content of the 25%Cr duplex 8S  increased with increasing temperature to reach about 80% after 1623K(1350'  C) heating. The

-

<!-- image -->

Fig.  7  Effect of temperature on  pitting potential in synthetic seawater

Fig.8 Effect of temperature on  crevice corrosion potential in  synthetic seawater

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9  Effect of  temperature and  chloride concentration on crevice corro­ sion resistance at 0.4V for 48h

<!-- image -->

ferrite content of the 28%Cr duplex SS did not change so much; it was  still only 65% after 1623K(1350" C) heating. That is attributed to the rapid auste­ ni te phase formation during the cooling on  the 28%Cr duplex SS  which contains high N  of O.  3%. Nitrogen atom  is the potential element for stabilizing the austenitic phase and diffuses more rapidly than the metal element atoms such as Ni, Cr  and  Mo. Al  though the pitting potentials of the both duplex SSs  were decreased in the same  manner, the 28%Cr duplex SS  after 1623K(1350"  C) heating was still more resistant to pitting corrosion than the 25%Cr duplex SS's  base  metal.

The corrosion resistance of the welded  joint was  investigated to clarify the effect of the welding procedure. Firstly, the girth welding was  performed by  GTAW  with the heat input of 6 to 13.5kJ/cm using the similar filler metal to the 28%Cr duplex  SS. The  results are shown in Fig. 11 where the pitting potential is plotted against the heat input. The  pitting potential decreased with increasing heat input. However even when  the heat input was  12kJ/cm, the pitting potential was ·about  0.5V  vs SCE and still higher than that of the 25%Cr duplex  SS's  base  metal.

Next, the corrosion resistance of the tube-to-tube sheet weldment was investigated to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the seal weldment to be employed  on  the construction of a tubu­ lar heat exchanger. It is necessary before the testing to select a tube sheet material matching with the 28%Cr duplex SS  tube. The  corrosion of the tube sheet is in general thought to be less serious than the tube itself be­ cause the tube sheet is exposed  to the lower temperature environment and the cathodic protection is more  effef:ti  vely applied. For that reason the 25%Cr duplex SS plate was  employed  as the tube sheet material applicable to the 28%Cr duplex SS  tube in this work. The  edge preparation for welding was shown  in Fig. 12. The  welding was  performed by GTAW  with the heat input of 5. 8kJ/cm using the 28%Cr or the 25%Cr duplex SS filler metal. The  pitting potential was measured  and  the P. I. value of the weld metal was  calculated based on  the dilu­ tion of the weld  metal by  the tube and the tube sheet materials. Fig. 13  shows the correlation between the pitting potential and the calculated P. I. value. It was  found that the pitting potential depended on the calculated

~

<!-- image -->

Fig .10 Effect of heating temperature on ferrite content and pitting potential of  duplex  SSs

Fig.11 Effect of  welding condition on pitting potential of girth weld­ ment

<!-- image -->

Fig.12 Edge  preparation for tube-to-tube sheet welding

<!-- image -->

- P. I. value. The pitting corrosion resistance of the seal weldment of the 28%Cr  duplex SS  tube to the 25%Cr duplex SS  tube sheet was  superior to the 25%Cr duplex SS's base metal. Consequently, the superiority of the corrosion resist­ ance of the 28%Cr duplex SS  is consid­ ered to be  maintained even at the seal weldment  in which  the conventional 25%Cr duplex SS  is employed  as the tube sheet material.

## 4. Conclusions

Fig.13 Pitting potential of tube-to­ tube sheet weldment

<!-- image -->

- 1) A  super-duplex stainless steel which  was  composed  of  27.5%Cr-7%Ni-3.8%Mo-0.3%N was developed from  the investigation of the weldment  performance. The  seamless tube of the alloy was  successfully manufactured by  the  powder metallurgical process.
- 2) The  corrosion resistance of the 28%Cr duplex SS  in hot seawater environments was superior to the conventional 25%Cr duplex SS  and  almost equal to those of super-ferritic and  super-austenitic stainless steels.
- 3)  The  25%Cr duplex  SS was  found  to  be  applicable as  the tube sheet material matching with the 28%Cr  duplex SS tube from  the  viewpoint of  the pitting corrosion resistance of the seal weldment.
- 4) The  developed alloy was  concluded to be suitable for the application in the highly corrosive environments such  as  hot seawater.

## 5.  References

- 1)  R.  R.  Irving: IRON  AGE, Dec. (1983), 68.
- 2)  R.  M. Davison  and  J. D.  Redmond: Mater. Perform., Jan.  (1990), 57.
- 3)  H.  Egashira, T.  kudo  and  H.  Miyuki:  3rd  Asian-Pacific Corr. Cont. Conf., Taipei, 1983.
- 4) I. A.  Franson and  M. J. Johnson:  CORROSION/89, New  Orleans, 1989,  No.  296.
- 5)  H.  Miyuki, K.  Ohta  and  N.  Yano:  EVALMAT'89, Kobe,  1989,  Al-2, to be  published.
- 6)  A.  P.  Bond:  CORROSION/85, Boston, 1985,  No.  206  .
7. .  7)  T.  S.  Lee  and  R.  M. Kain:  CORROSION/83, Anaheim,  1983,  No.  69.
- 8)  A.  Garner: CORROSION/80, Chicago, 1980,  No.  35.
- 9) J. Charles, J. P. Audouard, F. Dopoison, J. M.  Lardon, P. Soulignac and  D.  Catelin: CORROSION/89, New  Orleans, 1989,  No.  110.
- 10) P. Dillon and  Associates: Performance of Tubular Alloy Heat Exchangers in Seawater Service in the Chemical  Process Industries, MTI, St. Louis, 1987,  26.
- 11)  Y.  Komizo,  K.  Ogawa  and  S.  Azuma: Quarterly J. of  Japan  Weld.  Soc., 8(1990), 242.
- 12)  H.  Tsuge, Y.  Tarutani and  T.  Kudo:  Corrosion, 44(1988), 305.
- 13)  H.  Miyuki, T.  Kudo,  M.  Koso,  M. Miura  and  T.  Moroishi: ASM  Metal Congress, St. Louis, 1982, 8201-005.
- 14)  M. Nishiguchi, T.  Kudo,  T. Fukuda,  Y.  Ohashi  and  K.  Asabe:  Sumitomo Search, (1990), in printing.
- 15) J. R. Maurer  and  D.  L. Vuillaume: International Colloquium, Choice of Materials for Condenser  Tubes  and  Plates, Avinion, 1982.
- 16)  M.  Miura, M.  Koso,  T. Kudo and  H.  Tsuge: Quarterly J. of Japan Weld.  Soc., 7(1989), 94.

'