See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273913647

## [Corrosion characteristics of high entropy alloys (HEAs)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273913647_Corrosion_characteristics_of_high_entropy_alloys_HEAs?enrichId=rgreq-4c7de587aff88657717821b114eff3eb-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzI3MzkxMzY0NztBUzoyMzY4NzY2MzYzNTY2MDhAMTQzMzQ4NzE5OTExNQ%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf)

Article in Materials Science and Technology · March 2015

DOI: 10.1179/1743284715Y.0000000026

<!-- image -->

## Corrosion characteristics of high entropy alloys (HEAs)

## Y. Qiu * 1 , M. A. Gibson 1,2 , H. L. Fraser 1,3 and N. Birbilis 1

The present paper reports on the electrochemical properties of a wide range of high entropy alloys (HEAs) in a 0 ? 6 M NaCl solution. A consolidated treatise of the topic has to date been lacking, and the purpose of the work herein is to present a primitive galvanic series for numerous HEAs, along with a broad survey of results typifying their electrochemical characteristics, passivity and comparative electrochemistry. The results are coupled with microstructural characterisation. The range of potentials for HEAs is comparable to or nobler than austenitic stainless steel, with a number of HEAs displaying higher pitting potential ( E pit ) values than stainless steels, in spite of possessing heterogeneous microstructures.

Keywords: High entropy alloy, Corrosion, Galvanic series, Polarisation, Electrochemistry, Microstructure

## Introduction

Structural alloys including steels, aluminium, magnesium, titanium or nickel based alloys, are typically based on alloy design centred on controlling the phase evolution from one or two principle alloying elements. While additional elements are often added to many alloy systems for the purposes of inoculation, grain refinement, corrosion resistance, scavenging or melt protection, such additions are not intended to interfere with the phase evolution. 1-2 A decade ago, Yeh et al. 3 advanced the concept of so called high entropy alloys (HEAs), which are alloys composed of five or more principle elements in equimolar or near equimolar ratios with concentration of each element in the range of 5-35 at-%.

The unique aspect of HEAs that has aroused interest in such systems is that, instead of forming ordered intermetallic phases, they seem to have the tendency to form solid solutions, considered to be stabilised by the high entropy of mixing. 3 However, pursuit of HEAs has indicated that the high entropy of mixing is in itself not enough to assure the formation of a random solid solution, 4-5 with only selected compositions (in the range of what is considered a HEA) forming what can be termed as simple solid solutions. Zhang et al. 6 proposed that in order to form solid solutions, high entropy alloys should be composed of elements that possess small differences in atomic size, along with the absolute enthalpy of mixing being near zero. Reports suggest atomic size differences v 6 ? 5%, an enthalpy of mixing in the range of 2 15 to 5 kJ mol 2 1 , while the entropy of mixing should be in the range of * 12-17 ? 5 J K 2 1 mol 2 1 . HEAs have been reported with high hardness and high

1 Department of Materials Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Vic. 3800, Australia

2 CSIRO Manufacturing Flagship, Clayton, Vic. 3168, Australia

3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

* Corresponding author, email yao.qiu@monash.edu

compressive strength, both at room temperature and at elevated temperature. 3,7-13 They have also been reported to possess outstanding resistance to wear and oxidation 13-14 and high thermal stability, 15 which has stimulated significant interest in HEAs as promising candidates for many applications.

In terms of the corrosion performance of HEAs, aqueous corrosion testing has also been reported over the past decade. 13,16-23,25-37 In one of the earliest studies since the discovery of HEAs, Chen et al. 16 compared the electrochemical properties of a Cu0 ? 5NiAlCoCrFeSi HEA with 304 stainless steel (AISI type 304 SS), reporting that over a wide range of NaCl and H2SO4 (sulphuric acid) concentration, the resistance to general corrosion of Cu0 ? 5NiAlCoCrFeSi was superior to that of 304SS, irrespective of the electrolyte concentration varying from 0 ? 1 to 1 M. However, the resistance to pitting corrosion of Cu0 ? 5NiAlCoCrFeSi was reported to be inferior to that of 304SS in a chloride environment on the basis of anodic polarisation testing and SEM images of the HEA after an anodic polarisation. 16 In the case of as cast AlCoCrFeNi, it has been reported that, due to the segregation of Cr to interdendritic regions and also to fine precipitates within the dendrites, the Cr depleted dendrites suffer from selective corrosion in 0 ? 6 M NaCl. 17 This phenomenon would be akin to sensitisation in stainless steels where localised corrosion occurs at sites of Cr depletion; however, such phenomena are significantly less studied in HEAs and have only been reported in this specific case. 17 In a similar alloy with Cu additions, Qiu 18 reported that AlCrFeNiCoCu demonstrated excellent corrosion resistance in 1 M NaCl, compared to 304SS, with the AlCrFeNiCoCu HEA presenting a more noble potential and a corrosion -current density about an order of magnitude lower than 304SS. In the Al free variant of this alloy, Hsu et al. 19 investigated the corrosion behaviour of the FeCoNiCrCux system and noted that an increased proportion of Cu deteriorated the corrosion resistance of FeCoNiCrCux, which they attributed to microgalvanic

corrosion caused by segregation of Cu. The suggestion was that Cu rich interdendritic regions were less noble than the Cu depleted dendrites; therefore, the Cu rich regions were dissolved preferentially.

For the Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNiBx system studied in 1N H2SO4, the general corrosion resistance of Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNi was found to be superior to that of 304SS. 20 It was also determined that the B lean HEAs performed best in terms of corrosion resistance, as the addition of B led to decreased corrosion resistance purported to be due to the formation of Cr borides. However, Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNiBx was noted as not being prone to localised corrosion. 20

In comparing within a given class of HEAs, it was reported that an increased proportion of Al in AlxCrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 alloys led to a higher general corrosion susceptibility of HEAs in a 0 ? 5 M H2SO4 solution. In a 1 M NaCl solution, the pitting potentials of Al0 ? 5CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 HEAs are significantly lower than Al free CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 by * 140 mV. 21 Kao et al. 22 also examined the effect of Al additions on the corrosion of HEAs, indicating that a higher amount of Al in Al x CoCrFeNi alloys was detrimental to corrosion resistance in 0 ? 5 M H2SO4 at temperatures higher than 27 u C. Chou et al. 23 examined the influence of molybdenum on the corrosion resistance of Co1 ? 5CrFeNi1 ? 5Ti0 ? 5Mox alloys in 0 ? 5 M H2SO4 and 1 M NaOH solutions. Interestingly, in contrast to conventional stainless steels, the authors suggested that the corrosion resistance of the Mo free HEA was superior to the Mo containing alloys. However, in the case of a 1 M NaCl solution, the Mo containing HEAs were less susceptible to pitting corrosion compared with the Mo free alloy as judged by cyclic potentiodynamic polarisation testing. 23 The effect of Ni additions on the corrosion of the Al2CrFeCoCuTiNi x system has also been investigated. In both 0 ? 6 M NaCl and 1 M NaOH, the corrosion of Al2CrFeCoCuTiNi x alloys decreased with Ni addition ( x &lt; 1) and then increased with increasing Ni ( x &gt; 1), 13 a response that is again counter to the wisdom in the behaviour of stainless steels. 24 The addition of Nb to CoCrCuFeNi was reported to promote a lower corrosion current density. 25 In the case of the many element Al2CrFeCoCuNiTi x system, 26 HEA variants containing Ti demonstrated lower corrosion rates than Ti free HEA in a 0 ? 5 M HNO3 solution. Conversely, for Al0 ? 3CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5Ti x and Al0 ? 3CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5Six systems, the addition of small amounts of Ti ( x ¼ 0 ? 2) or Si ( x ¼ 0 ? 2) deteriorated the general corrosion resistance of the HEAs. 27

Based on the abridged review above, it is noted that while several corrosion related studies on HEAs exist, such as those in the limited list herein, the complexity of the alloy systems makes a first order analysis of general trends across different HEA systems very difficult. For example, in some cases, Al is found to be beneficial, in others detrimental. This is determined by the particular constituents of the remaining composition. This is similarly the case for Cu, Ti and Si. Furthermore, a wider comparison of HEA corrosion across systems is yet to be reported; moreover, the correlation between processing, thermal history and microstructure, individually and in combination, is all in their infancy. Aspects of electrochemistry also need to be understood, on the basis that HEAs have the potential for significant segregation of solute and the existence of several phases (of widely varying composition) simultaneously, and do not follow the conventional golden rules of stainless steel with regards to the influence of Cr, Ni or Mo.

This paper conducts an initial consolidated summary leading to a primitive galvanic series for select HEAs of widely varying composition in 0 ? 6 M NaCl. This is accompanied by a discussion of the corrosion potentials, passivity and electrochemical characteristics with reference to the polarisation response and alloy microstructure of a range of HEA systems.

## Experimental

## Material preparation

The HEAs reported herein were produced by a number of routes, each unique on the basis of capability of consolidating metals with wide melting point differences. As such, conventional casting was not employed.

HEAs were produced by laser melting (LM). In such cases, metal powders (with purity higher than 99 ? 5 wt-% and typical size of 50-100 m m) were used. The LM of powders was carried out using a Trumpf TruLaser Cell 7040, with melting performed under an argon atmosphere.

Production of HEAs using mechanical alloying was also carried out. In such cases, metal powders were blended in the appropriate proportion using high energy ball milling. The milled powders were then consolidated fully using spark plasma sintering (SPS) (DR.SINTER model SPS-925).

Additionally, arc melting (AM) was also employed to produce HEAs. This technique employed conventional AM in a reduced argon atmosphere. The HEAs produced were melted on a water cooled copper hearth, with the starting material being pure (99 ? 99 wt-%) metal chunks.

## Electrochemical tests

Potentiodynamic polarisation testing was conducted in a typical three-electrode flat cell (Princeton Applied Research) with the specimen as the working electrode, a saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE) and a platinum mesh as a counter electrode. The test solution was in each case quiescent 0 ? 6 M NaCl, and testing was at 25 u C. Before testing, the specimens were ground to 2000 grit finish (SiC paper), and at least four replicate tests were conducted for each alloy. The open circuit potential (OCP) was measured for 30 min before polarisation testing to achieve an approximately stable potential. Each specimen was scanned potentiodynamically at a rate of 1 mV s 2 1 from the initial potential of 2 150 mVSCE versus OCP to the final potential of 2 ? 0 VSCE using a Biologic VMP potentiostat under the control of EC-Lab 10 ? 02 software. The corrosion potentials ( E corr) and corrosion current densities ( i corr ) were estimated by user based analysis via EC-lab.

## Microstructural analysis

The constituent phases of the HEAs were determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD). This was done using an X-ray diffractometer (Phillips PW1130), with a Cu target, a voltage of 40 kV, current of 25 mA and a scan range from 10 u to 100 u with a speed of 1 ? 5 u min 2 1 . Known compounds in the powder diffraction database

were not employed to identify phases for HEAs, as the phases (and their unique composition) in HEAs are largely unknown. Additionally, the interplanar spacing (d-spacing) of HEAs are unique and not in the powder diffraction database. Instead, we calculate the d-spacing for individual peaks in the collected XRD pattern and match the d-spacing according to the selection rules for the relevant crystal structure. For example, for an fcc structure, the d-spacing of peaks in XRD pattern shall refer to the (111), (200), (220) and (311) plane.

As such, what we are most concerned with (namely, for homogenous HEAs) is the crystal structure (i.e. fcc or bcc). The following is how we determine the crystal structure of phases. We calculate the dsp for individual peaks in XRD pattern and see if these dsp matches the selection rules for fcc or bcc structure. For example, for fcc structure, dsp of peaks in XRD pattern should refer to (111), (200), (220) and (311) plane.

Specimens were also investigated via scanning (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). SEM samples were polished to a 1 m m diamond paste finish and then imaged using a FEI Nova NanoSEM 450 in the backscattered electron (BSE) mode. TEM specimens were prepared by focused ion beam milling, using a Quanta 3D FIB. A thin foil was milled from a bulk HEA specimen via Ga ion milling, followed by 'lift out' onto a Cugrid, and followed subsequently by a thinning process of the foil to * 100 nm in thickness. TEM imaging was carried out using an FEI Tecnai G2 T20 TEM.

## Results and discussion

## Galvanic series and pitting potential of high entropy alloys

Based on results from potentiodynamic polarisation testing, the summary of the corrosion potentials ( E corr ) and pitting potentials ( E pit) for a selection of HEAs in a quiescent 0 ? 6 M NaCl solution at 25 u C (a standardised electrolyte to allow comparison with published galvanic series) is shown in Fig. 1.

The E corr of these HEAs is in a range of * 2 498 to 2 180 mVSCE. As anticipated, the HEAs presented corrosion potentials that are significantly nobler than those of mild steel and aluminium alloys. The corrosion potentials of some of the select HEAs were in a band comparable to that between ferritic and austenitic stainless, with some HEAs displaying even more noble potentials than austenitic stainless steels. The E pit of most HEAs studied herein is more positive than that of ferritic stainless steels. On the basis of discrimination of pitting susceptibility from E pit alone, several HEAs demonstrate a higher (more noble) E pit than austenitic stainless steel, particularly Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 alloy, which displays the very noble E pit of 1040 mVSCE.

Some general observations from Fig. 1 include that corrosion potentials of the HEAs are not necessarily in the range expected from their constituent metals. For example, for the HEA AlCoCrCuFe, one would expect that the E corr would be below 2 0 ? 35 to 2 0 ? 4 VSCE (corresponding to the known OCPs of Cr, and Cu in chloride solutions, being the most noble elements in this HEA combination). This shows that the HEA forms heterogeneous and unique phases that have their own electrochemical characteristics, independent of their constituent metals. If one assumes CoFeNi (SPS) as the baseline for analysis, it can be seen that the addition of Cr ennobles the HEA (more noble E corr) and improves the HEA resistance to pitting (higher E pit). This can be inferred by comparing the E corr and E pit of the HEA with the composition CoCrFeNi (Fig. 1). The incorporation of Ti into CoCrFeNi further increases the E pit as observed for the alloy Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7. The addition of Al to the HEA with the base CoCrFeNi makes them more noble, as inferred from the corrosion potentials of Al0 ? 3CoCrFeNi (AM), Al0 ? 6CoCrFeNi (AM) or Al0 ? 9CoCrFeNi (AM), albeit that Al is the least noble element in all the HEAs studied (pure Al having its own characteristic potential of * 2 1 VSCE (in 0 ? 6 M NaCl).

It is also noteworthy that there is a significant difference in pitting potentials between HEAs made by SPS and HEAs with the identical composition made by AM. CoCrFeNi (AM) exhibits an E pit of 442 mVSCE, while CoCrFeNi (SPS*) and CoCrFeNi (SPS^) have a much lower E pit ( 2 28 and 2 8 mVSCE respectively). The possible reasons for these characteristics are discussed in the following sections.

## Electrochemical response and characterisation of select high entropy alloys

In order to consolidate the survey of the electrochemical properties of the HEAs reported herein, the alloys have been separated on the basis of some key characteristics. In the case of the data shown in Fig. 2, these three HEAs were selected on the basis that they present the most heterogeneous microstructures among the reported HEAs (their associated microstructures are seen in Fig. 2 b -g ). Such microstructures are dramatically different to stainless steels and significantly more heterogeneous than most conventional structural alloys.

The potentiodynamic polarisation curves of as cast AlCoCrCuFe, (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 and AlTiVCrSi in a 0 ? 6 M NaCl solution are shown in Fig. 2 a . The tabulated values of extracted parameters compared to 304L (from Hsu et al. 19 ) are listed in Table 1, which include corrosion potential E corr , corrosion current density i corr , pitting potential E pit and the potential range of the passive region ( E corr 2 E pit ). The comparison to 304L was made on the basis that the HEAs are Mo free and C free. The electrochemical data reveal that these alloys are 'spontaneously passive'. This is particularly obvious for (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 and AlTiVCrSi, but less so for AlCoCrCuFe. The latter alloy has significantly more rapid cathodic kinetics, and hence a significantly higher E corr . The enhanced cathodic kinetics of AlCoCrCuFe also results in a higher corrosion current density ( i corr). The window of passivity on AlCoCrCuFe (from repeat tests) is as much as * 130 mV; however it is between 600 and 650 mVSCE for both AlTiVCrSi and (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05. The latter alloys reveal a clear and wide window of passivity, in spite of the 0 ? 6 M NaCl electrolyte and a heterogeneous microstructure, which is a key point. From an electrochemical perspective, such passivity in the presence of a multiphase microstructure is somewhat unprecedented in conventional alloys or stainless steels (perhaps with the exception of some superalloys or Zr alloys). The smaller window of passivity in the case of AlCoCrCuFe is perhaps associated with the presence of Co, and the intense segregation of heavier elements to the regions of light contrast as seen in Fig. 2 c . Previous studies on Cu containing HEAs reveal that copper has the

1 Summary of HEA corrosion potential ( E corr in mVSCE) and pitting potential ( E pit in mVSCE) in quiescent 0 ? 6 M NaCl at 25 8 C; CoCrFeNi (SPS*) was held at 1000 8 Cfor 5 min, while CoCrFeNi (SPS^) was firstly held at 500 8 Cfor 5 min and then sintered at 1000 8 C for another 5 min; E corr and E pit data of steels and aluminium alloys are obtained from previous studies 24,38-39

<!-- image -->

2 a polarisation curves for as cast AlCoCrCuFe, (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 and AlTiVCrSi in 0 ? 6 M NaCl at 25 8 C; b BSE image of AlCoCrCuFe at low magnification; c BSE image of AlCoCrCuFe at higher magnification; d BSE image of (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 at low magnification; e BSE image of (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 at higher magnification; f BSE image of AlTiVCrSi at low magnification; g BSE image of AlTiVCrSi at higher magnification

<!-- image -->

tendency to segregate into the interdendritic regions to form a Cu rich fcc phase between Cu depleted dendrites. 9,19,40-41 Table 2 lists the binary mixing of enthalpy ( D H mix) of Cu with other elements. These values of D H mix are either very close to zero or fairly positive. This indicates that there is a weak bonding force between Cu and the other elements. Therefore, Cu tends to segregate into interdendritic regions. The XRD data for as cast AlCoCrCuFeareprovidedinFig.3.AlCoCrCuFeconsists of a Cu rich fcc phase together with a bcc phase (Cu depleted matrix). When AlCoCrCuFe is exposed to an aqueous environment, the Cu depleted matrix is

Table 1 Electrochemical data associated with general corrosion and pitting corrosion of HEAs and 304L stainless steel in quiescent 0 ? 6 M NaCl at 25 8 C

| Sample                                   | E corr/mVSCE   | i corr / m A cm 2 2   | E pit/mVSCE   |   Average E pit 2 E corr/mV |
|------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------|---------------|-----------------------------|
| AlCoCrCuFe                               | 2 264 ¡ 5      | 0 ? 967 ¡ 0 ? 22      | 2 130 ¡ 5     |                         135 |
| (TiAl) 0 ? 7 V 0 ? 15 Fe 0 ? 1 Ni 0 ? 05 | 2 388 ¡ 12     | 0 ? 037 ¡ 0 ? 01      | 263 ¡ 10      |                         651 |
| AlTiVCrSi                                | 2 498 ¡ 20     | 0 ? 168 ¡ 0 ? 03      | 11 ¡ 10       |                         510 |
| 304L 19                                  | 2 250          | 0 ? 601               | 230           |                         480 |

Table 2 Binary mixing of enthalpy of Cu with Co, Cr and Fe 42

| Element pair   | D H mix /kJ mol 2 1   |
|----------------|-----------------------|
| Cu-Al          | 2 1                   |
| Cu-Co          | 6                     |
| Cu-Cr          | 12                    |
| Cu-Fe          | 13                    |

comparatively nobler than the Cu rich interdendritic regions; therefore, the Cu rich phase may be a site for preferential dissolution, with such aspects discussed in the following section.

In considering a family of HEAs that are of relatively similar composition, but which present a significant difference in electrochemical performance (especially in terms of passivation), the polarisation response of such a selection of alloys is shown in Fig. 4. The alloys presented (Fig. 4) are CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9, CoCrFeNi (SPS^) and Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 in 0 ? 6 M NaCl. As with all the HEAs surveyed, the alloys shown in Fig. 4 are 'spontaneously passive' in 0 ? 6 M NaCl. In addition, these alloys all have very similar cathodic reaction kinetics. The cathodic kinetics are more rapid than those of (TiAl)0 ? 7V0 ? 15Fe0 ? 1Ni0 ? 05 and AlTiVCrSi (Fig. 2), and hence, it is posited that the presence of Co enhances the cathodic kinetics and concomitantly raises the E corr .

The microstructures of CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 , CoCrFeNi (SPS^) and Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 are also provided in Fig. 4, while the associated electrochemical parameters are presented in Table 3. The difference in the electrochemical properties of the alloys is that the passive window ( E pit 2 E corr ) size scales according to Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 w CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 w CoCrFeNi (SPS^). This result is interesting on the basis of the conventional wisdom that

3 XRD pattern for as cast AlCoCrFeCu

<!-- image -->

relates to corrosion and merits comment. The largest window of passivity correlates to the alloy variant that contains Ti, which is conventional in its own right. However, it is unique when considered with the microstructure. The very large passive window of Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 persists in spite of a very heterogeneous microstructure (at least three unique phases) and significant segregation. The phase denoted as 'A' in the BSE image of Ti0 ? 3(CoCrFeNi)0 ? 7 (Fig. 4 g ) is enriched in Ti ( * 62 ? 8 at-%), with the associated energy dispersive spectroscopy(EDS)pointanalysisshowninTable4.Inthe case of CoCrFeNi (SPS^), the microstructure is also multiphase, with the fine black dots in Fig. 4 e that are actually synonymous with very fine pores. As noted, CoCrFeNi (SPS^) exhibits a significantly lower E pit compared to CoCrFeNi(AM).Inaddition,the i corrofCoCrFeNi(SPS^) (0 ? 610 m Acm 2 2 ) is significantly larger than that of CoCrFeNi (AM) (0 ? 108 m Acm 2 2 ). CoCrFeNi (AM) is a single fcc solid solution, as indicated by the XRD spectrum in Fig. 5 a . On the other hand, CoCrFeNi (SPS^) exhibits a multiple phase microstructure with the corresponding XRD spectrum, as shown in Fig. 5 b , indicating that it consists of an fcc and sigma type phase ( s ). Praveen et al. 43 reported that CoCrFeNi sintered at 1000 u C using SPS consisted of a major fcc phase and a minor Cr rich sigma phase. This sigma phase could be a CrFe/CrCo/CrFeCo intermetallic compound. 43 EDS mapping results for CoCrFeNi (SPS^) are provided in Fig. 6, confirming that the sigma phase is rich in Cr, while the fcc matrix is Cr depleted. In austenitic stainless steel, the s phase is an intermetallic compound with a complex tetragonal structure. The s phase is rich in Cr, with a typical normalised composition of the s phase being Fe ( * 59 wt-%), Cr ( * 38 wt-%) and Ni ( * 3 wt-%). 44 In stainless steel, Cr rich sigma phase has a detrimental effect on the corrosion resistance including pitting resistance. 24 Similar to the effect of Cr rich sigma phase in stainless steel, the evolution of a Cr rich s phase in CoCrFeNi (SPS^) is also detrimental.TheCrrich s phaseisnoblerthantheadjacent Cr depleted fcc matrix, therefore rendering the Cr depleted matrix susceptible to corrosion.

In the case of CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 , this alloy exhibits a fine interconnected microstructure, which is unique on the basis of the connectivity of microstructural features. CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 is comparatively very noble in 0 ? 6 M NaCl and also exhibits a low corrosion current density compared to the other HEAs listed in Tables 1 and 3. In contrast to the posit that the presence of Co enhances cathodic kinetics and concomitantly raises the E corr , a simpler microstructure is also associated with a high E corr , albeit on the basis of reduced anodic kinetics. The instance of reduced anodic kinetics correlates with a low corrosion current density, as depicted by CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 . The XRD spectrum for as cast CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 is shown in Fig. 7 a . The as cast

<!-- image -->

- 4 a polarisation curves for as cast CoCrFeNiAl0.9, CoCrFeNi and Ti0.3(CoCrFeNi)0.7 in 0.6 M NaCl at 25 8 C; b BSE image of CoCrFeNiAl0.9 at low magnification; c BSE image of CoCrFeNiAl0.9 at higher magnification; d BSE image of CoCrFeNi at low magnification; e BSE image of CoCrFeNi at higher magnification; f BSE image of Ti0.3(CoCrFeNi)0.7 at low magnification; g BSE image of Ti0.3(CoCrFeNi)0.7 at higher magnification

Table 3 Electrochemical data associated with general corrosion and pitting corrosion of HEAs in 0.6 M NaCl at 25 8 C [CoCrFeNi (SPS^) was first hold at 500 8 C for 5 min and then sintered at 1000 8 C for another 5 min]

| Sample                    | E corr/mVSCE   | i corr / m A cm 2 2   | E pit/mVSCE)   |   Average E pit 2 E corr/mV |
|---------------------------|----------------|-----------------------|----------------|-----------------------------|
| CoCrFeNiAl 0.9            | 2 217 ¡ 35     | 0 ? 093 ¡ 0 ? 028     | 164 ¡ 29       |                         381 |
| CoCrFeNi (SPS^)           | 2 304 ¡ 31     | 0 ? 610 ¡ 0 ? 276     | 2 8 ¡ 59       |                         260 |
| Ti 0 ? 3 (CoCrFeNi) 0 ? 7 | 2 273 ¡ 31     | 0 ? 036 ¡ 0 ? 030     | 1040 ¡ 13      |                        1313 |

Table 4 EDS point analysis of phase 'A' of Ti0.3(CoCrFeNi)0.7 indicated in Fig. 4 g

5 XRD pattern for a as cast CoCrFeNi (AM) and b as cast CoCrFeNi (SPS^)

|                       | Ti/at-%   | Co/at-%   | Cr/at-%   | Fe/at-%   | Ni/at-%   |
|-----------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Ti 0.3 (CoCrFeNi) 0.7 | 62 ? 8    | 8 ? 0     | 8 ? 9     | 8 ? 4     | 11 ? 9    |

<!-- image -->

CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 consists of a combination of fcc and bcc phase, not excluding that the latter may be in the form of the B2 phase (which is an ordered bcc phase). The bright field (BF) image of CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 is provided in Fig. 7 b , and the select area diffraction pattern (SADP) of the dark contrast phase along the [011] zone axis is provided in Fig. 7 c and is consistent with a B2 phase with a lattice parameter of 0 ? 3001 nm. The SADP of the light contrast phase along the [011] zone axis in Fig. 7 d is consistent with an fcc phase with

<!-- image -->

6 EDS mapping results for CoCrFeNi (SPS^) reveal that sigma phase is rich in Cr, while the matrix is Cr depleted

<!-- image -->

[20(°)](http://www.maneyonline.com/action/showImage?doi=10.1179/1743284715Y.0000000026&iName=master.img-005.jpg&w=462&h=170)

7 a XRD pattern for as cast Al0.9CoCrFeNi; b TEM BF image of as cast Al0.9CoCrFeNi; c , d SADPalong [011] zone axis for 'dark' and 'light' phase respectively

a lattice parameter of 0 ? 3704 nm. CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 exhibits a simple microstructure (fcc þ B2), and there is no segregation of elements, like Cu in Cu containing HEAs or Cr in CoCrFeNi (SPS^), that could deteriorate the corrosion performance of the HEA. The simple microstructure and no elemental segregation could be associated with the relatively high corrosion potential and small corrosion current density of CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 .

## Avenues for future work

Future avenues of work in order to provide a more comprehensive determination of the corrosion of HEAs should pay particular attention to the following aspects.

## Multiscale characterisation

The microstructures of HEAs present features that span the atomic scale to the tens of micrometre scale ( * 6 orders of magnitude). The area where the least characterisation exists to date is in the nanoscale, and therefore, HEAs should be examined by high resolution techniques such as atom probe tomography and high resolution TEM. Of the works to date that have studied nanostructure, useful insights have emerged, as one study 45 employs three-dimensional atom probe (3DAP), revealing the presence of fine Cu rich precipitates, Al-Ni rich plates and Cr-Fe rich features in cast AlCoCrCuFeNi HEA.

Singh et al. 46 used 3DAP and TEM to study the ferromagnetic behaviour of AlCoCrCuFeNi HEAs, revealing the decomposition of CrFeCo rich regions into FeCo rich and Cr rich domains respectively.

## Kinetics and nature of phase transformations

The majority of work to date that relates to HEAs (including the present work) have focused on 'as produced' alloys. This is in contrast to the very careful thermomechanical processing, which is applied to the study of common structural metals. In terms of simplicity, thermogravimetric analysis needs to be performed on HEAs to study the kinetics of, and characteristic temperature of, phase transformation. While phase diagrams for HEAs would be beneficial for understanding the kinetics and nature of phase transformations, existing CALPHAD (calculated phase diagram) databases are presently too primitive to allow for accurate HEA phase prediction. Indeed, however, as has been shown, 47 CALPHAD will be a very important tool to calculate the phase fields and fractions for HEAs, with some success reported for the AlCoCrFeNi and AlCoCrFeNi systems.

## Surface film characterisation

The surface films formed upon different HEAs have been characterised using X-ray photoelectron

spectroscopy (XPS) by several researchers. 17,20,31 Such studies, however, have focused on the surface film following dissolution/polarisation. In one instance, both Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNi and Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNiB0 ? 6 were analysed following anodic polarisation in a deaerated 1N H2SO4 solution. For these alloys, the predominant surface oxide was a Cr2O3 based film. A native Cr2O3 film before dissolution would indeed contribute to beneficial pitting resistance, as typically demonstrated by such HEAs. 20 The CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 HEA also forms a Cr2O3 based passive film on the surface after anodic polarisation in a 15% H2SO4 solution (as detected by XPS). 31 Al0 ? 3CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 showed characteristic peaks corresponding to both Al2O3 and Cr2O3 (by XPS) after anodic treatment in a 15% H2SO4 solution. 31 It is not expected, however, that the Al2O3 can form as a native oxide (in conjunction with, or in addition to, Cr2O3). The Al2O3 is most likely formed due to preferential Al dissolution, then subsequent oxidation in the aqueous environment or air. Such a phenomenon of Al2O3 being detected in conjunction with Cr2O3 is common to Cr and Al containing superalloys (nominally Ni based superalloys) following high temperature oxidation. 48-51 In such instances, the oxidation occurs in air (at high temperatures) and preferential oxidation of Al occurs, somewhat akin to what occurs due to preferential Al dissolution in aqueous electrolytes. For example, in the case of AlCoCrFeNi coatings, after anodic polarisation in 3 ? 5 wt-% NaCl, both Al2O3 and Cr2O3 peaks are observed in XPS spectra. 17 In any case, however, the XPS analysis of 'as polished' HEAs is particularly important to understand and is a particular aspect of HEAs that has essentially received no attention to date and must form the basis for future work. It has been observed herein that Ti improves the pitting resistance of the HEAs and also widens their passive window. The detection and quantification of Ti in passive films formed upon Ti based HEAs will also be important to study.

## Long term exposure testing

In terms of studying the corrosion morphology, and the longer term damage accumulation (as a ground truth measurement), long term exposure testing is important. In terms of atmospheric corrosion resistance, because HEAs present passivity in the realm of stainless steels, atmospheric exposure will require very long term durations (i.e. years). In the laboratory setting, immersion in concentrated electrolytes is one avenue that is also beneficial. Kao et al. 22 and Hsu et al. 19 have reported mass loss/ immersion tests on the Al x CoCrFeNi and FeCoNiCrCux systems respectively. For Al x CoCrFeNi (where x ¼ 0, 0 ? 25, 0 ? 5 and 1), immersion test were conducted in 0 ? 5 M H2SO4 for 15 days, with mass loss revealing that the corrosion rate of Al0 ? 5CoCrFeNi ( * 1 g m 2 2 h 2 1 ) and AlCoCrFeNi ( * 2 g m 2 2 h 2 1 ) is significantly higher than that of CoCrFeNi (0 ? 12 g m 2 2 h 2 1 ) and Al0 ? 25CoCrFeNi (0 ? 16 g m 2 2 h 2 1 ). FeCoNiCrCux alloys have been immersed in 3 ? 5 wt-% NaCl at 25 u C for 30 days, with the corrosion rate of FeCoNiCrCu x calculated from mass loss and i corr obtained from polarisation tests revealing the same trend, in that the addition of Cu increases the corrosion rate. 19 It is, however, necessary to carry out longer term exposure testing in order to understand the general corrosion behaviour of HEAs.

## Conclusions

1. A galvanic series in 0 ? 6 M NaCl for select HEAs produced by either LM, AM or SPS has been presented. It is seen that the HEAs tested are significantly nobler than carbon steel and aluminium alloys, occupying potentials in the range of ferritic and austenitic stainless steels, with some HEAs nobler than austenitic stainless steels.
2. All the HEAs tested herein displayed 'spontaneous passivity' in 0 ? 6 M NaCl. The pitting potentials, however, varied, with a range of passive windows ( E pit 2 E corr) varying by as much as 1 V. The passivation tendency of HEAs was evident, in spite of possessing significantly heterogeneous microstructures.
3. Following from the point above, it should be noted that the microstructures evolved in the HEAs studied herein were nominally multiphase, with significant solute segregation. This aspect requires future work on the basis that characterisation is required to establish the kinetics of phase transformations, driven by partitioning, which is difficult to predict from existing thermodynamic calculations or conventional metallurgical systems.
4. In general, the addition of Cr to HEA systems improves their corrosion and pitting resistance. However, this benefit of Cr is severely decreased in HEAsprocessed by SPS (when compared to AM), as theCrsegregatestotheCrrich s phase,makingtheCr depleted matrix more prone to corrosion. The addition of Ti to the CrCoFeNi (AM) system was found to further increase the pitting corrosion resistance.
5. Variations in the electrochemistry and passive window of the AlCoCrCuFe system were attributed to disadvantageousCusegregationtointerdendriticregions.
6. CoCrFeNiAl0 ? 9 displays a highly noble corrosion potential and low corrosion current density while possessing a simple structure of (fcc þ B2) with no severe elemental segregation.

## Acknowledgements

The authors express thanks to Professor B. S. Murthy (IIT Madras), A/Professor Rajeev Gupta (Akron) and Dr Daniel Fabijanic (Deakin) for provisions and assistance with some samples reported herein. The technical assistance of Dr Sebastian Thomas is also gratefully acknowledged. The authors also appreciate the use of facilities in the Monash Centre for Electron Microscopy (MCEM) and the Monash Centre for Additive Manufacturing (MCAM).

## References

1. I. J. Polmear: 'Light alloys', 4th edn; 2005, Oxford, ButterworthHeinemann.
2. H. K. D. H. Bhadeshia and S. R. Honeycombe: 'Steels', 3rd edn; 2006, Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann.
3. J. W. Yeh, S. K. Chen, S. J. Lin, J. Y. Gan, T. S. Chin, T. T. Shun, C. H. Tsau and S. Y. Chang: 'Nanostructured high-entropy alloys with multiple principal elements: novel alloy design concepts and outcomes', Adv. Eng. Mater. , 2004, 6 , (5), 299-303.
4. S. Guo and C. T. Liu: 'Phase stability in high entropy alloys: formation of solid-solution phase or amorphous phase', Prog. Nat. Sci. Mater. Int. , 2011, 21 , (6), 433-446.
5. F. Otto, Y. Yang, H. Bei and E. P. George: 'Relative effects of enthalpy and entropy on the phase stability of equiatomic highentropy alloys', Acta Mater. , 2013, 61 , (7), 2628-2638.

6. Y. Zhang, Y. J. Zhou, J. P. Lin, G. L. Chen and P. K. Liaw: 'Solid-solution phase formation rules for multi-component alloys', Adv. Eng. Mater. , 2008, 10 , (6), 534-538.
7. Y. Zhang, X. Yang and P. K. Liaw: 'Alloy design and properties optimization of high-entropy alloys', JOM , 2012, 64 , (7), 830-838.
8. Y. J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. L. Wang and G. L. Chen: 'Microstructure and compressive properties of multicomponent Alx(TiVCrMnFeCoNiCu)100 2 x high-entropy alloys', Mater. Sci. Eng. A , 2007, 454-455 , 260-265.
9. C. W. Tsai, M. H. Tsai, J. W. Yeh and C. C. Yang: 'Effect of temperature on mechanical properties of Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNi wrought alloy', J. Alloys Compd , 2010, 490 , (1-2), 160-165.
10. X. F. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Qiao and G. L. Chen: 'Novel microstructure and properties of multicomponent CoCrCuFeNiTix alloys', Intermetallics , 2007, 15 , 357-362.
11. O. N. Senkov, C. Woodward and D. B. Miracle: 'Microstructure and properties of aluminum-containing refractory high-entropy alloys', JOM , 2014, 66 , (10), 2030-2042.
12. O. N. Senkov, G. B. Wilks, D. B. Miracle, C. P. Chuang and P. K. Liaw: 'Refractory high-entropy alloys', Intermetallics , 2010, 18 , (9), 1758-1765.
13. X. W. Qiu and C. G. Liu: 'Microstructure and properties of Al2CrFeCoCuTiNix high-entropy alloys prepared by laser cladding', J. Alloys Compd , 2013, 553 , 216-220.
14. M. H. Chuang, M. H. Tsai, W. R. Wang, S. J. Lin and J. W. Yeh: 'Microstructure and wear behavior of AlxCo1 ? 5CrFeNi1 ? 5Tiy high-entropy alloys', Acta Mater. , 2011, 59 , (16), 6308-6317.
15. R. Sriharitha, B. S. Murty and R. S. Kottada: 'Alloying, thermal stability and strengthening in spark plasma sintered AlxCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloys', J. Alloys Compd , 2014, 583 , 419-426.
16. Y. Y. Chen, T. Duval, U. D. Hung, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'Microstructure and electrochemical properties of high entropy alloys-a comparison with type-304 stainless steel', Corros. Sci. , 2005, 47 , (9), 2257-2279.
17. Q. H. Li, T. M. Yue, Z. N. Guo and X. Lin: 'Microstructure and corrosion properties of AlCoCrFeNi high entropy alloy coatings deposited on AISI 1045 steel by the electrospark process', Metall. Mater. Trans. A , 2012, 44 , (4), 1767-1778.
18. X. W. Qiu: 'Microstructure and properties of AlCrFeNiCoCu high entropy alloy prepared by powder metallurgy', J. Alloys Compd , 2013, 555 , 246-249.
19. Y. J. Hsu, W. C. Chiang and J. K. Wu: 'Corrosion behavior of FeCoNiCrCux high-entropy alloys in 3 ? 5% sodium chloride solution', Mater. Chem. Phys. , 2005, 92 , (1), 112-117.
20. C. P. Lee, Y. Y. Chen, C. Y. Hsu, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'The effect of boron on the corrosion resistance of the high entropy alloys Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNiBx', J. Electrochem. Soc. , 2007, 154 , (8), C424-C430.
21. C. P. Lee, C. C. Chang, Y. Y. Chen, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'Effect of the aluminium content of AlxCrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 high-entropy alloys on the corrosion behaviour in aqueous environments', Corros. Sci. , 2008, 50 , (7), 2053-2060.
22. Y. F. Kao, T. D. Lee, S. K. Chen and Y. S. Chang: 'Electrochemical passive properties of AlxCoCrFeNi (x ¼ 0, 0 ? 25, 0 ? 50, 1 ? 00) alloys in sulfuric acids', Corros. Sci. , 2010, 52 , (3), 1026-1034.
23. Y. L. Chou, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'The effect of molybdenum on the corrosion behaviour of the high-entropy alloys Co1 ? 5CrFeNi1 ? 5Ti0 ? 5Mox in aqueous environments', Corros. Sci. , 2010, 52 , (8), 2571-2581.
24. A. J. Sedriks: 'Corrosion of stainless steels'; 1996, New York, John Wiley and Sons.
25. J. B. Cheng, X. B. Liang and B. S. Xu: 'Effect of Nb addition on the structure and mechanical behaviors of CoCrCuFeNi highentropy alloy coatings', Surf. Coat. Technol. , 2014, 240 , 184-190.
26. X. W. Qiu, Y. P. Zhang and C. G. Liu: 'Effect of Ti content on structure and properties of Al2CrFeNiCoCuTix high-entropy alloy coatings', J. Alloys Compd , 2014, 585 , 282-286.
27. B. Ren, R. F. Zhao, Z. X. Liu, S. K. Guan and H. S. Zhang: 'Microstructure and properties of Al0 ? 3CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5Tix and Al0 ? 3CrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 Six high-entropy alloys', Rare Met. , 2014, 33 , (2), 149-154.
28. Y. Y. Chen, H. C. Shih, J. W. Yeh and T. Duval: 'Electrochemical kinetics of the high entropy alloys in aqueous environments-a comparison with type 304 stainless steel', Corros. Sci. , 2005, 47 , (11), 2679-2699.
29. Y. Y. Chen, U. T. Hong, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'Selected corrosion behaviors of a Cu0 ? 5NiAlCoCrFeSi bulk glassy alloy in 288 8 C high-purity water', Scr. Mater. , 2006, 54 , (12), 1997-2001.
30. Y. Y. Chen, T. Duval, U. T. Hong, J. W. Yeh, H. C. Shih, L. H. Wang and J. C. Oung: 'Corrosion properties of a novel bulk Cu0 ? 5NiAlCoCrFeSi glassy alloy in 288 8 C high-purity water', Mater. Lett. , 2007, 61 , (13), 2692-2696.
31. C. P. Lee, Y. Y. Chen, C. Y. Hsu, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'Enhancing pitting corrosion resistance of AlxCrFe1 ? 5MnNi0 ? 5 high-entropy alloys by anodic treatment in sulfuric acid', Thin Solid Films , 2008, 517 , (3), 1301-1305.
32. Y. L. Chou, Y. C. Wang, J. W. Yeh and H. C. Shih: 'Pitting corrosion of the high-entropy alloy Co1 ? 5CrFeNi1 ? 5Ti0 ? 5Mo0 ? 1 in chloridecontaining sulphate solutions', Corros. Sci. , 2010, 52 , (10), 3481-3491.
33. C. M. Lin, H. L. Tsai and H. Y. Bor: 'Effect of aging treatment on microstructure and properties of high-entropy Cu0 ? 5CoCrFeNi alloy', Intermetallics , 2010, 18 , (6), 1244-1250.
34. C. M. Lin and H. L. Tsai: 'Effect of annealing treatment on microstructure and properties of high-entropy FeCoNiCrCu0 ? 5 alloy', Mater. Chem. Phys. , 2011, 128 , (1-2), 50-56.
35. C. M. Lin and H. L. Tsai: 'Evolution of microstructure, hardness, and corrosion properties of high-entropy Al0 ? 5CoCrFeNi alloy', Intermetallics , 2011, 19 , (3), 288-294.
36. Z.H.Gan,L.M.Xu,Z.H.Lu,H.H.Zhou,C.H.Song,F.Huangand A. Novel: 'High-entropy alloy AlMgZnSnPbCuMnNi with low free corrosion potential', Appl. Mech. Mater. , 2013, 327 , 103-107.
37. X. W. Qiu, Y. P. Zhang, L. He and C. G. Liu: 'Microstructure and corrosion resistance of AlCrFeCuCo high entropy alloy', J. Alloys Compd , 2013, 549 , 195-199.
38. D. A. Jones: 'Principle and prevention of corrosion', 2nd edn; 1996, Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall.
39. J. R. Davis: 'Corrosion of aluminum and aluminum alloys'; 1999, Materials Park, OH, ASM International.
40. M. A. Hemphill, T. Yuan, G. Y. Wang, J. W. Yeh, C. W. Tsai, A. Chuang and P. K. Liaw: 'Fatigue behavior of Al0 ? 5CoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloys', Acta Mater. , 2012, 60 , (16), 5723-5734.
41. C. J. Tong, Y. L. Chen, S. K. Chen, J. W. Yeh, T. T. Shun, C. H. Tsau, S. J. Lin and S. Y. Chang: 'Microstructure characterization of AlxCoCrCuFeNi high-entropy alloy system with multiprincipal elements', Metall. Mater. Trans. A , 2005, 36 , (4), 881-893.
42. A. Takeuchi and A. Inoue: 'Classification of bulk metallic glasses by atomic size difference, heat of mixing and period of constituent elements and its application to characterization of the main alloying element', Mater. Trans. , 2005, 46 , (12), 2817-2829.
43. S. Praveen, B. S. Murty and R. S. Kottada: 'Phase evolution and densification behavior of nanocrystalline multicomponent high entropy alloys during spark plasma sintering', JOM , 2013, 65 , (12), 1797-1804.
44. J. M. Vitek and S. A. David: 'The sigma phase transformation in austenitic stainless steels', Weld. J. , 1986, 65 , 106-111.
45. S. Singh, N. Wanderka, B. S. Murty, U. Glatzel and J. Banhart: 'Decomposition in multi-component AlCoCrCuFeNi highentropy alloy', Acta Mater. , 2011, 59 , (1), 182-190.
46. S. Singh, N. Wanderka, K. Kiefer, K. Siemensmeyer and J. Banhart: 'Effect of decomposition of the Cr-Fe-Co rich phase of AlCoCrCuFeNi high entropy alloy on magnetic properties', Ultramicroscopy , 2011, 111 , (6), 619-622.
47. C. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. Chen and W. Cao: 'Computational thermodynamics aided high-entropy alloy design', JOM , 2012, 64 , 839-845.
48. M.F.Lo ´pez, A. Gutie ´rrez, M. C. Garcı ´a-Alonso and M. L. Escudero: 'Surface analysis of a heat-treated, Al-containing, iron-based superalloy', J. Mater. Res. , 1998, 13 , (12), 3411-3416.
49. H. P. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, W. J. Li and C. Han: 'Oxidation behaviors of Ni-Cr-Al superalloy foams at 1000 8 C in air', J. Cent. South Univ. , 2013, 20 , 3345-3353.
50. S. Seal, S. C. Kuiry and L. A. Bracho: 'Surface chemistry of oxide scale on IN-738LC superalloy: effect of long-term exposure in air at 1173 K', Oxid. Met. , 2002, 57 , 297-322.
51. N. Birbilis and R. G. Buchheit: 'Measurement and discussion of low-temperature hot corrosion damage accumulation upon nickel-based superalloy Rene 104', Metall. Mater. Trans. A , 2008, 39 , (13), 3224-3232.