## Critical  Potentials  for  Pitting  Corrosion of Ni, Cr-Ni, Cr-Fe, and  Related  Stainless  Steels

J. Horvath 1 and  H. H. Uhlig*

Department  of  Metallurgy and Materials Science,

Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, Cambridge,  Massachusetts

## ABSTRACT

Critical pitting potentials for  the binary  Cr-Fe and Cr-Ni alloys  in 0.1N NaC1  become more noble (correspondingly more resistant  o  pitting) with  increasing Cr content, particularly in  the  region  25-40%  Cr and 10-20%  Cr,  respectively. The potentials for  57.8%  Cr-Fe and pure Cr fall within  the  transpassive  region. Ni containing 3.2%  Mo, to  the  contrary, shows a lower (more active)  critical potential; higher  per cent  Mo-Ni  alloys  appear to fall within the transpassive region  corroding  anodically as MOO4-plus Ni  + + without pitting. Ni alloyed with 15%  Cr-Fe shifts the  potential in  the  noble  direction; Mo alloyed  with  15% Cr, 13% Ni  stainless steel  has  a  similar  but  even greater effect. At 0~ 15%  Cr, 13%  Ni stainless  teel exhibits a potential 0.5v more  noble than at 25~ corresponding  to greatly  increased  resistance to pitting. This  shift is  less pronounced  for  the  stainless  steels containing Mo;  in fact, at  or above 1.5%  Mo,  the critical potentials at 0~ are below those  at 25~ In 0.1N NaBr, alloyed Mo  shifts the  potentials  lightly in  the  active direction, contrary to a marked noble  shift in 0.1N NaC1. At 0~ the potentials are  still more active. These trends  correlate with  observed  pitting for  15%  Cr, 13%  Ni stainless  teel and the  similar alloy  containing 2.4%  Mo  in 10%  FeBr~ both at  0  ~  and 25~ Absence of pitting is  observed  in 10% FeC13  at  0~ for 15%  Cr, 13%  Ni stainless steel, but not for  the  similar alloy  containing 2.4% Mo, which pits. The over-all results  are explained  on the  basis  of  competitive adsorption at  the  metal  surface  and an effect of  temperature on the  structure of  the  double  layer.

The  concept of a  critical potential above  which passive  alloys are  liable to pitting corrosion in halide solutions, but below which they resist pitting, presumably for  an  indefinite period  of  exposure, has been described  by several  investigators. This subject  was reviewed, among others,  in  an earlier  paper  by Kolotyrkin  (1) and briefly by Leckie  and Uhlig (2). The latter reported the  effect of  various  environmental factors on the  observed  critical potentials of  18-8  stainless steel in  NaC1  solutions.

In view of the electrochemical mechanism  of pit initiation and  growth, it is concluded that pitting should be observed in aerated  halide  solutions, e.g., sea  water,  only  in  those  metals  and alloys whose critical potentials lie below the  reversible oxygen  electrode (approximately 0.8v  in  air). This  is  supported  by  data of  Table  I listing critical potentials for  several metals in  0.1N NaC1. In  sea  water (approximately 0.5N NaC1) these  values (1,  2) would  be expected  to  be  a  few centivolts more  active. Metals such  as  Cr  and  Ti, therefore, having  critical potentials above lv successfully  resist pitting corrosion in aerated  sea water in contrast to the other  listed metals  with values  below 0.8v.  The  only exceptions that  may  arise  in practice result from crevices at which  stagnant electrolyte of higher  C1- concentration accumulates  because  of  electrochemical transport (lowering the  critical potential) and, more importantly, of lower  pH  and  dissolved 02 concentration causing  localized breakdown of passivity  (7).  In general, the  more noble  the  critical potential, the  more resistant is  the  metal  to  pitting attack. But  how fast  pits grow once initiated usually  depends on rate of  the  cathodic reaction, which in  aerated NaC1 is  dependent  on rate of  O2 diffusion and  reduction. The over-all rate, in turn,  is  a function  of available total cathode  surface (8)  and conductivity of  the  electrolyte.

In this  paper, the effect of alloying on the critical potentials of  the  Cr-Fe-Ni-Mo  system  in  aqueous  NaC1 solution is  reported, first as  exhibited by several binary

* Electrochemical  Society  Active  Member.

x  I n s t i t u t e   of  General and Physical Chemistry, University of Szeged,  Szeged, Hungary.

alloys and then  by some of  the  ternary and quaternary alloys  of the  usual  stainless alloy  compositions. Data also  include  an interesting, perhaps  unexpected, effect of temperature  on the critical potentials of stainless steels containing alloyed Mo.

## Experimental Procedure

Alloys  were prepared  in the laboratory from  pure components by vacuum melting  in  dense  alumina  crucibles. After  allowing A  or  He  to  enter the  furnace  the melt was  drawn  into 7 mm diam  Vycor  tubes and quenched in  water.  The  ingots were homogenized in  A or He, usually  at 1050~176 for  several hours after which each composition  was  determined  chemically. Ingots  of Ni-Cr,  Ni-Mo, and  Cr-Fe were cold  rolled to 0.25 cm, then annealed  at 1000~176 and water quenched.  The Cr-Fe alloys containing more than  40% Cr  were  difficult to roll  or swage, hence electrodes were machined directly from the homogenized ingot. Ingots  of  the  lower %  Cr-Fe alloys and of the stainless  steels were swaged to about 0.45 cm  diam rods, annealed at 1050~ and  water quenched. 2 All electrodes  measured approximately  2 cm  long and were either 0.4 cm  diam  or 0.5 cm  wide by 0.2 cm  thick. They  were mounted  as described  earlier  (2) by  a threaded member allowing attachment to a  nickel

A subsequent anneal after quenching to  avoid  intergranular attack was  not  necessary  because of  low  carbon  content (0.001O.O02%).

Table  I. Critical  pitting  potentials for  various metals in  0.1N NaCI, 25~  *

| Metal   | Critical potential, v   | Reference    |
|---------|-------------------------|--------------|
| AI      | 0.45                    | (3)          |
| Ni      | 0.28                    | Present data |
| 18-8    | 0.26**                  | (2)          |
| Zr      | 0.46                    | (1)          |
| Cr      | >i.0                    | (4)          |
| Ti      | >1.0                    | (5,6)        |

wire.  The  electrode was  firmly  pressed by means  of the wire against  a  glass  tube separated by  a  Teflon gasket, assuring exposure  of  only  the  electrode, Teflon, and  glass  surface  to the electrolyte. The  electrodes were abraded  to a final 3/0 emery paper,  and pickled usually  in 15% HNO3,  5% HF  at 80~ for 5 min  to remove the  cold  worked surface.

Iron  used  for  the melts  was electrolytic grade,  first deoxidized  then decarburized in H2  to approximately 0.001-0.002% C. Chromium  was of special high purity obtained from  Union  Carbide Company. Carbonyl nickel  was  made  available by courtesy  of The  International  Nickel Company.  Molybdenum was  99.9% and  for  some  few  alloys  it  was  spectroscopic grade, but  without  differing results.

The electrolyte for  most experiments was 0AN  NaC1 deaerated  with purified nitrogen  (passed  over Cu  at 450~ but without  flow of nitrogen during  the  time of actual  measurements.  The  Pyrex cell, fitted with ground glass  joints as described  previously  (2),  was located in  an air  thermostat  maintained at  25  ~ ·  0.2~ which could  also  be adjusted to  constant temperatures higher  or lower than room  temperature. A  Wenking potentiostat was employed in  conjunction with  a chart recorder.  The electrolyte was usually maintained above the Teflon  gasket-electrode interface. Several comparative  measurements were  made holding the electrolyte below the  Teflon  gasket  allowing  a meniscus to form at the gas-liquid interface. Under conditions  of continuous  potential sweep,  such  critical  potentials were  found in general  to  be  higher (more noble) than for  total immersion.  However, for  longtime  or  steady-state conditions, values  tended  to  focus on  the same  potential for partially or totally  immersed electrodes, hence in  view of  the  shorter times needed to achieve  steady state  under conditions  of total  immersion, it  was this  procedure  which was usually  followed. Pitting was observed  to initiate preferably  at  the  Teflon-electrode interface, but  was not restricted to  such areas  in  long-time polarization runs.

The  experimental  procedure was  to first polarize the electrode potentiostatically at the least noble  potential within  the passive  region  for  at least  15 min in order  to  achieve  steady-state passivity. The potential  was then advanced in stages  of 50 my,  allowing 5 min between each change.  Initially the current  decreased  or remained  constant  after each potential adjustment, but eventually a steadily increasing current at some  potential V'c indicated the onset of pitting (or of transpassivity). Steady-state values Vc  were obtained  subsequently  by  holding the potential for long  times  at  a fixed  value  and then  observing pitting or the  lack of  it under a low power microscope.  The lowest  potential for which pitting could not be observed  after a  10-hr  or longer  period of constant  polarization was considered to  be  the  steady-state value Vc. Reproducibility was in  the  order  of  · mv.

## Results

Binary alloys.--Values of the steady-state critical potentials Vc  for binary Cr-Fe alloys  in O.1N NaC1 at 25~ are shown  in Fig. 1. Similar  potentials V'c obtained  by changing  potentials in 50 mv  increments at  5-rain intervals were only slightly more noble. Measurements  began at 12%  Cr because  the  alloys  below this  composition  exhibited  less  or no  passivity and hence  localized breakdown  of passivity, leading  to pitting, did  not  occur under  present  experimental conditions. Values of Ve  rise  rapidly  in the region of 25-40% Cr  indicating appreciably  greater  resistance to pitting at and above this  composition  range.  Some pitting was  observed  for  the 48.8%  Cr-Fe alloy, but not for  57.8%  Cr-Fe nor for  pure Cr. The latter electrodes  corroded  uniformly  with  production of  C r O 4 - (transpassivity).

Although  the  general shape  of  the  curve  is  the  same, data for  Cr-Fe alloys  reported  by Kolotyrkin  (1) in 0,1N NaC1  show more noble  values  in  the  range  &gt;25%

60

Fig.  1. Critical  pitting  potentials  for Cr-Fe  allo,]s  in O.1N  NaCI, 25~

<!-- image -->

Cr.  These differences can probably  be ascribed to use of  more rapid  polarization rates  than we  used,  which shifted  potentials prematurely  into  the transpassive region accompanied by  CrO4--  formation.  The  reported observation  by  Steigerwald  (9)  that anodic pitting in  0.1N NaC1  does  not  occur  on chromized  steel surfaces  containing above 29% Cr is  not readily  explained.  Perhaps again,  lack of steady state  conditions  in  his  experiments, which were achieved  in  our measurements  only  through long-time  polarization runs,  may  be accountable for  the  discrepancy.

Values  of  steady  state potentials Vc,  and also  of  nonsteady  state  values  V'c obtained  as described  earlier, for Cr-Ni alloys  in 0.1N NaC1  are shown  in Fig.  2. Because Ni  itself is  passive, measurements for  this  alloy  series began with  0%  Cr.  Values  of  Vc rise to  more noble values  especially within  the range 10-20%  Cr. Pitting  was  observed for  all compositions  including the  maximum 29.4%  Cr alloy. Measurements were not extended to higher  Ni  compositions  because a  twophase alloy  region  forms which complicates interpretation of  any potential trend.

The  Mo-Ni  alloys  behave  quite differently as  is shown  by potentiostatic polarization  curves of Fig.  3. The corrosion potentials, corrosion  behavior, and galvanostatic  anodic polarization of these alloys  have been reported  previously (10).  Pure nickel  exhibits a normal critical potential V'c  at  0.3v,  above which pitting occurs.  The polarization curve beyond V'c is almost  linear up to a current  density  of 0.4 ma/cm  2 and  no  oscillations are observed. Addition of 3.2% Mo  to nickel  lowers the  value  of V'c to  about  0.2v  and the  potential increases abruptly just  above  0.1  ma/cm  2.

Fig. 2. Critical  pitting  potentials  for Cr-Ni  alloys in O.1N  NaCI, 25~

<!-- image -->

i

I

I0

Fig. 3. Potentiostatic  anodic  polarization  curves  for Mo-Ni alloys in 0.1N  NaCI,  25~

<!-- image -->

Alloys containing still larger  Mo additions  show  no break,  but exhibit  instead  an  increasing current  for small  increments  of potential beginning  at values  as active  as --0.3v. No  pitting was  observed  in alloys  of 6.8%  or higher  Mo  content. A  long-time  run during the  initial  period f polarization showed  only a dark film,  probably  molybdenum  oxide,  covering  the electrode  surface. At about  0.1  ma/cm  2,  current oscillations occur,  the  peak values  of which are  indicated in  Fig. 3.  These  cease  at  about  0.9v, but  the  potential continues to rise  steeply. It is concluded  that MOO4-forms beginning  at the potentials corresponding  to current oscillations accompanied by  periodic breakdown  and formation  of  passivity, until on reaching  a still higher potential range,  conditions become stabilized. The upturn of potential at 0.1 ma/cm 2 for  the 3.2%  Mo-Ni alloy is  probably  also  the  result of  MOO4--  formation. The Pourbaix  diagram (11) for  pure  molybdenum, for example,  shows that  molybdate  formation at  pH  7 begins  at  about  --0.4  to --0.5v in  line with  the  formation of  molybdates  in  the  Ni-Mo  alloys beginning  at  somewhat more noble values.  Although molybdenum  was detected by chemical  analysis of  the  anolyte  after polarization of  the  Mo-Ni  alloys, it  was  not  easy  to determine  its  precise valence. However, the probability that  molybdate  formation is  the  cause  of  current oscillations  in the 0-0.9v range is supported  by  similar oscillations observed  for  the 15%  Cr, 13%  Ni stainless steel  (Fig.  4)  caused by  chromate formation  in the potential range of  0.7-1.55v. The Pourbaix  diagram  for pure  Cr (12)  at  pH  7 shows that  CrO4-- forms  beginning at  0.5-0.6v which is  expectedly lower  but in  reasonable correspondence  with the lower limit  of the observed  oscillations for  the  stainless alloy.

## Cr-Fe-Ni Stainless Steels

The  solid solution  ternary 15% Cr  alloys  containing increasing  amounts of  alloyed Ni were prepared by  H.  Feller who reported their passive properties  in  1.28N  H2SO4 (13). The  critical potentials for these alloys  in  0.1N  NaC1 at  25~ shift  in the noble  direction as Ni increases  (Fig.  5). The shift is  not  as  large as  for  equivalent Cr additions, but  the  potential change correlates with the wellknown  improved corrosion  and  pitting resistance of high Ni  stainless  steels in chloride  media  as compared to  the  nickel-free or low-nickel stainless  teels.

\_\_-

Fig. 4. Potentiostatic anorlic polarization curve  for  15% Cr,  13% Ni stainless  steel in  O.1N  NaCI, 25~

<!-- image -->

Kolotyrkin  (1) also  reported  more  noble  critical potentials for Cr-Ni-Fe stainless steels with increasing Ni content.

Alloyed  Mo  up to  2.4%  in  a 15%  Cr, 13%  Ni stainless  steel at  25~ similarly shifts the critical potential toward more noble  values  (Fig. 6).  The change of  potential is  relatively  greater than for  corresponding Ni additions, and accompanies  the well-known improved resistance of the Mo-containing  stainless steels (e.g. Type 316) to pitting corrosion in  chlorides. According to Tomashov et al. (14),  Vc  becomes still more noble with  increasing amounts of  alloyed Mo  above  2.4%.  The quantitative interpretation of data  for  high Mo  stainless  steels is  complicated, however,  by the formation of a  multiphase  structure. The present  alloys, relatively low in Cr and high in  Ni,  were chosen to  preserve  a  single-phase structure, as was  confirmed  by metal]ographic examination.

The potentiostatic behavior  of the 1.43%  Mo  stainless  steel is  shown  in  Fig.  7.  Here current  oscillations begin at the somewhat  lower  potential of 0.55v compared to 0.7v  for  Mo-free  stainless  teel  (Fig.  4) and reach a similar  upper  value of 1.5v.  It  is  likely that both MOO4-and  CrO4--  form  in this potential range.

Hospadaruk and Petrocelli (15) apparently obtained more active  values of  Vc in  0.5N NaC1  for  commercial 18-8  (Type 301), 18% Cr-Fe and  17% Cr, 13% Ni, 2.2%  Mo (Type 316) stainless  teel than  are  indicated

Fig.  5.  Critical  pitting potentials for 15% Cr-Fe  alloys with increasing Ni  content, in 0.1N  NaCI,  25~

<!-- image -->

J:ig.  6. Critical  pitting potentials for 15% Cr,  13% Ni  stainless steel  with  increasing  Mo content,  in  0.1N NaCI,  25~ and 0~

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7. Potentiostatic anodic  polarization curve  for 1.5%  Or,  13% Ni, 1.43% Mo stainless steel in 0,1N  NoCI,  25~

<!-- image -->

by our values  in 0.1N NaC1.  Although their  data do not support  an effect of C1-  concentration on Vc  for 18-8,  previous  data of Leckie and Uhlig (2) show  a shift  of 0.07v in the active  direction on  going from 0.1 to 0.5N NaC1.  This shift explains  a large  part  of the  difference in their  results  and  those presently reported. It  should  be mentioned  in  addition that  their use  of  austenitic alloys slowly  cooled  from the  annealing temperature  causes some  degree of carbide  precipitation and chromium depletion along  grain  boundaries. This effect would tend to artificially shift measured critical potentials in the active  direction and, according  to our  experience, would  also  appreciably decrease reproducibility of the  measurements.

At 40~ values  of  Vc for  the  15%  Cr,  13%  Ni stainless  steel  approximate  those at 25~ At  0~ however,  Vc  shifts to the markedly more noble value of 0.78v (Fig. 6) which is  0.5v  more noble  than  the  value at 25~ This appreciable shift  was first reported  for 18-8 by Leckie  and Uhlig (2) who  made  the prediction,  later confirmed,  that  pitting of 18-8 would not occur  in 10%  FeCI.~  at  0~ because  the oxidation-reduction  potential of 10%  FeC13  is  below the  observed critical potential at  this temperature.

Unexpectedly, the addition of  Mo to stainless steel is  found to  reduce  the  shift in  the  noble  direction occurring  at 0~ For the 1.3%  Mo  alloy, the values  of Vc at  0~ and 25~ are  the same, and for  2%  Mo  the value  at  0~ approximates  that  for  the  Mo-free  stainless  steel at 25~ At 0~ the 2.4%  Mo  alloy  reaches the transpassive state  and  no  definite critical potential  is observed.  Instead,  current  increases  continu- ously with potential and  the  electrode corrodes  uniformly.  Pitting can be induced,  however, if  the alloy is  polarized to a value  approaching  0.6v.  Accordingly the  alloy  containing 2.4%  Mo  immersed in 10%  FeC13 at 0~ for which  the oxidation-reduction potential lies above 0.6v,  showed definite pitting after two days, contrary  to the behavior of the alloy  without Mo which was free  of  pitting. In similar tests  at 25~ the 2.4%  Mo  alloy  did  not pit  within  two days  (it  probably would have for  longer  time exposure), but  the alIoy free of  Mo  was pitted.

It  was  observed (16, 17)  some  years ago that  the molybdenum-containing stainless  teels, although  relatively resistant to pitting in ferric chloride, tend to pit  in  much  shorter time in equivalent bromide solutions.  The  critical potentials conform to this  observation  as  shown  in  Fig.  8.  The value  of  Vc  (0.54v)  for the  I5%  Cr,  13%  Ni alloy in  0.1N NaBr at  25~  is 0.26v more noble than in 0.1N NaCI, hence pitting of this composition  alloy  is  less pronounced in  bromides  than in chlorides. However, on adding molybdenum  to the 15% Cr,  13% Ni  steel, values of  Vc  change  only slightly, tending  toward more  active  values.  This is in  contrast to  a marked shift in  the  noble  direction in chloride solutions, hence pitting in &gt;2% Mo  stainless steels, as observed,  is  more  pronounced in bromides than  in  chlorides. At 0~ the  value  of  Vc in  bromides for  the  Mo-free  stainless steel is  definitely below the value  at  25~ opposite  to  the  pronounced more noble shift observed  in  chlorides. The critical potential tends to decrease  still further on addition of 0.43%  Mo.  Indefinite results  are obtained  at  1.43%  Mo  or  above,  no well  established critical potentials  being observed. Apparently  the transpassive state  of the Mo stainless steels is  reached  at relatively low potentials and the alloys  corrode generally  without pitting. Pitting, as before, could  be induced  by polarizing to  a potential in the region  of 0.6v.  These trends  of critical potential were confirmed  by two-day  pitting tests in 10%  FeBr3 solutions, pitting occurring  at 0 ~ and at 25~ for  the 0%, 1.4%,  and 2.4% Mo  alloys.

## Discussion

The basic  mechanism accounting for  the  critical potential appears  to  be  one of C1-  adsorbing  competitively with oxygen of  the  passive film  for  sites on the metal surface. As  the potential is  made  more  noble, C1- ions  move  into  the  double layer  of the  electrode surface,  eventually reaching  at the critical potential the concentration required  to displace adsorbed  oxygen (or  an oxygen-H20 complex) at  favored  locations. Adsorbed  C1-  greatly  reduces the overvoltage  for anodic  dissolution of metal,  compared to the  situation for  adsorbed  oxygen,  thereby  initiating a pit.  This is essentially the mechanism  descr)bed  by  Leckie and Uhlig (2),  the  Russian school  (1) and by Brauns and

\_

I

Fig. 8. Critical pitting potentials for  15% Cr,  13% Ni  stainless steel  with  increasing Mo content in  0.1N NaBr, 25~ and  0~

<!-- image -->

Schwenk  (18).  A  different model requiring penetration  and breakdown of a supposed metal oxide passive  film was  described  by  Streicher  (17)  and  by Hoar,  Mears,  and Rothwell (19).

According to the adsorption model, the observed more  noble values  of Vr  for Cr-Fe alloys  with increasing Cr content is  ascribed to  the  increasing affinity  of the alloys  for oxygen compared to C1-. Since the Flade  potential is  a measure of passive  film  stability (20),  it  also  changes  with  Cr content but  in  the negative  or more  active  direction. The  sharp  rise  of Vc at  25-40%  Cr shown in  Fig.  1  compared to  the  similar pronounced  decrease of  Flade  potential at  10-30% Cr reported  by King and Uhlig (21) suggests, however,  that  increased  stability of the passive  film is only one factor  affecting Vc; the relative affinity of the  alloy for C1is  also  a factor.

When  Vc  becomes sufficiently noble  to overlap  the transpassive region, CrO4-- plus  Fe  + + +  are  produced as  anodic  products, and corrosion of  the  electrode surface may  then proceed uniformly  with little or no localized attack. Hence  the  57.8%  Cr-Fe alloy,  and probably  higher  Cr alloys including pure Cr as well, do  not pit  at the noble  potentials corresponding to pronounced  rise of  current in the potentiostatic curves, but they corrode  uniformly  instead. Whether pitting occurs  in any of the Cr-Fe alloys  at some  potential within  the transpassive  region probably  depends on whether  Vc is  exceeded  for  a particular alloy, the  rate of stirring, and whether the uniform corrosion rate by  CrO4--  formation  exceeds the  rate of localized corrosion. Since  pitting was  observed  in some  Cr-Fe alloys and also  in  some of the  Cr-Ni alloys polarized well  into the transpassive region, it  is  apparently possible  for  C1to adsorb  despite simultaneous CrO,-formation. However, the two ions  adsorb  competitively and it  is  expected  that  for  a sufficiently high surface concentration of  C r O 4 - - ,   adsorption of C1- would be less  probable  and CrO4-- would act  as a pitting inhibitor in  the  same  sense as do  other anions, e.g., SO4--,  C104-,  and NO3-  (2).

Steigerwald  (9) noted  that  &gt;30% Cr-Fe alloys are resistant to pitting on immersion  in 10%  FeC13.6H20 at  room temperature for  10 days.  The measured  oxidation-reduction potential of  18-8  in  10%  FeC13  inhibited with  5%  NaNO3  to  avoid  pitting (which  does  not  affect oxidation-reduction kinetics of  Fe  + + +  ~ Fe  +  +)  (22) is  about  0.8v (23).  Lack of pitting is  consistent with reported  values of Vc  shown  in Fig. 1 equal to or greater than  0.By at  or above approximately 34%  Cr.

The same considerations mentioned  above apply  to increasing values  of Vc  for  Cr-Ni alloys  (Fig. 2).  In the 15% Cr-Fe series, alloyed  Ni  shifts Vc  in the noble direction perhaps because  Ni, for one reason, has less  affinity for  C1-  than  does Cr. This is  shown by  the relative free energies  of formation  for the metal  chlorides (Table  II). Molybdenum, similarly, but to a greater extent, shifts Vc  of the 15% Cr, 13%  Ni alloy  series both because  of decreased  affinity of Mo for  C1-  and because  of its  increased affinity for  oxygen.  It  is  probable  furthermore that  the  greater tendency  of  the  Mo  stainless steels to  pit  in  bromide  compared  to  chloride solutions corresponds to  a relatively higher  affinity of  Mo for  Br-,  although  corresponding free  energy  data  are  not  available.

The situation becomes more  complex at low temperatures where the shift  of Vc  may  be  large  but

Table  II. Free energies of formation, 25~ (24)

| CrCle (c)    | Kcal --85.2   |
|--------------|---------------|
| NiCI~ (c)    | --65.1        |
| MoCI.~ (c)   | --34.6        |
| MOO4-- (aq.) | --218.8       |
| CrO4-- (aq.) | --176.1       |

where  relative affinities are not expected to differ appreciably from those  applying at  room temperature. However, the structure of the  double layer  is  probably  sensitive to temperature, as for  example occurs through  relative hydration  of ions  in  the outer  and perhaps also  the inner  Helmholtz layers, as well as through  hydration of the passive  film  itself. In other words, it  is  plausible that  the relatively greater  hydration  of both the passive  film  and  adsorbed  ions (altering their  effective radii)  at low  temperatures changes  both  concentration of  ions  in  the double  layer and their critical separation from oxygen of the  passive  film, thereby  affecting conditions for  competitive adsorption. Hence the  critical potential is  also  changed, the  direction of  which is  sensitive to  specific chemical affinities, in particular accounted  for by  alloyed Mo. Any  alternative mechanism based on relative ease  of penetration of ions  through  a supposed  passive  oxide film  brought  about  by similar temperature changes  is considered to  be  less plausible.

## Acknowledgment

The present research was aided  by a grant  from  the Office  of Saline  Water, U.S. Department of the Interior. One of  us (J.  H.) is  grateful for  the  award of  a fellowship by the  Ford Foundation. H. P. Leckie  contributed some  of the preliminary data and in particular the  final data  appearing in  Fig.  5.

Manuscript  submitted Nov. 29,  1967; revised  manuscript  received ca. April 30, 1968.  This paper was presented  at the Chicago Meeting, Oct. 15-19, 1967, as  Paper  77.

Any  discussion of this  paper  will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to be  published  in the  June  1969 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  Ya.  Kolotyrkin, Corrosion, 19,  261t  (1963).
3.  H. Kaesche, Z.  Physik. Chem. N.  F., 34, 87  (1962).
2.  H.  Leckie and H.  Uhlig, This Journal, 113, 1262 (1966).
4.  N. Greene,  C. Bishop,  and M.  Stern, This  Journal, 108, 836  (1961).
6.  F.  Posey  and  E.  Bohlmann,  Second  Symp.  on Fresh  Water from the  Sea,  Athens,  Greece,  May 1967.
5.  N.  Hackerman  and C. Hall, J. Phys. Chem., 57, 262 (1953).
7.  H.  Uhlig, This  Journal, 108, 327  (1961).
9.  R.  Steigerwald, ibid., 22,  107 (1966).
8.  O.  Ellis and F. LaQue, Corrosion, 7, 362  (1951).
10.  H. Uhlig, P.  Bond, and H. Feller, This  Journal, 110, 650 (1963).
11.  M.  Pourbaix,  "Atlas  of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions," p. 275,  Pergamon Press, New  York (1966).
12. Ref.  11,  pp.  262-264. 12.
- N. Tomashov, G. Chernova,  and O. Marcova, Corrosion, 20,  166t (1964). 14.
- H.  Feller  and  H.  Uh]ig, This Journal, 107, 864 (1960). 13.
- V. Hospadaruk and J.  Petrocelli, This  Journal, 113, 878 (1966). 15.
- M. Streicher, This  Journal, 103, 375  (1956). 17.
- H.  H.  Uhlig and J. Wulff, Trans.  A.I.M.E., Iron and Steel Div., 135, 494  (1939). 16.
- E. Brauns andW. Schwenk, Archiv. Eisenhi~ttenw., 32, 387  (1961). 18.
- T.  Hoar,  D. Mears,  and G. Rothwell, Corros.  Sci., 5, 279 (1965). 19.
- H. Uhlig,  "Corrosion  and Corrosion  Control," pp. 61-62, John  Wiley  &amp; Sons,  Inc., New  York (1963). 20.
- M. Stern, This  Journal, 104,  559,  600 (1957). 22.
22. P, King and H. Uhlig, J. Phys. Chem., 63, 2026 (1959). 21.
- H. Leckie, Unpublished data. 23.
- W.  Latimer,  "Oxidation Potentials," Prentice-Hall, New  York (1952). 24.