## The Role of Alloyed  Molybdenum  in Austenitic Stainless  Steels in the  Inhibition  of  Pitting in Neutral  Halide Solutions*

KATSUH/SA  SUGIMOTO  AND  YOSHINOBU  SAWADA*

## Abstract

In  the  passive  region of austenitic stainless steels  alloyed with Mo,  the  formation of  MoO 4  2 ions  can be  exp 2 ~cted  in  neutral halide solutions by  the  transpassive dissolution of  Mo. It  has been  shown  that MoO4 ,ans  added  to  neutral NaCl  solutions act  as an effective inhibitor against  pitting of  austenitic stainless steels  with and  without Mo. The interaction between alloyed Mo  in  the steels  and  added MoO4 zions in the solutions is  appreciable. It is  likely that the inhibition of pit growth by the adsorption of MoO4  2 ions  which are  thought to result  from the  dissolution of  the  steels  at  the  initial stage of  pitting leads to  increased  pitting resistance  of  austenitic stainless  steels  containing Mo.

It  is a well known  fact  that  the  addition of  Mo  to  austenitic stainless steels increases  pitting resistance because  of shifts of the pitting potential in the noble direction. 1 6 Laboratory experiments, how­ ever,  show  that the  factors which lead  to the  increase  in  the  pitting resistance of the steel by alloying Mo are very complex. For instance,  the  beneficial effect of  Mo  addition decreases with increase in temperature, 7 and the critical temperature at which pitting initiates depends on the Mo content of the steel and the Cl concentration of the solution used.  8 It has  been reported that alloyed Mo  is  ineffective to inhibit bromide pitting. 4 · 9 · 1 ° Further­ more, published data indicating some differences between the effects of Mo additions on austenitic stainless steel and ferritic stainless  steel  have been  presented. 11

Although the  action of  Mo  in  regard to improving the  resistance of austenitic stainless steels  against  pitting is  not known precisely, we  have  proposed the following 2  mechanisms to  account for the inhibition: (1) the  inhibition of  pit initiation by  an  improvement of the  properties of the  passive  film for protection against invasion of Clions,  and  (2)  the  inhibition of pit growth by  the  adsorption of MoO4  2 ions,  which are thought to  be concentrated within a pit, by the  dissolution of  the  alloyed Mo  at  the  initial stage of  pitting.

Our recent X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCA) studies on the passive film compositions of austenitic stainless steels containing Mo have shown that Mo is one of the essential constituents of  the  passive film, and  that the  Mo  content of  the  film increases  with increase  in  Mo  content of the  steels.  12  Therefore, it would be  reasonable to expect that the  contribution of Mo  in  the passive  film is  the  cause  of  the  improved pitting resistance of  steel. It  is  uncertain, however, whether the  increase  in  pitting resistance  is brought about  only by  modifications of  the  properties of  the  passive film, because  the  alloyed Mo  may  dissolve  as MoO 4  2 ions  by  the transpassive reaction of Mo in the passive region of the steel. Furthermore, it is  difficult to explain by  the  film theory why the alloying addition of  Mo  is ineffective in  a NaBr  solution.

Although knowledge of the  contribution of  MoO 4  2 ions  to  the mechanism of pitting inhibition for the Mo-containing austenitic stainlei~ \_steel  is  insufficient, it has  previously been  reported that MoO4 10ns added  to  a neutral NaCl  solution effectively inhibit the pitting dissolution of an  austenitic stainless steel that does not contain Mo. 1 3 Suzuki, et al, suggested  the possibility of a  higher concentration of MoO4  2 ions in an  active pit than in the bulk solution for  Type  316L and  an  18Cr-16Ni-5Mo steel. 14

The purpose of the present study is to clarify the  common feature in  both methods for pitting inhibition, that is,  the  alloying

*submitted for  publication May,  1974;  revised  April, 1975.

*Departme~t of Metallurgy, Faculty of Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai,  Japan.

TABLE  1 -Composition of the Steels  Studied (Wt%)

| Specimen       |     C |   s; |   Mn |     p |    s |    Cr |    N; |   Mo |
|----------------|-------|------|------|-------|------|-------|-------|------|
| 20Cr-25Ni      | 0.053 | 0.54 | 1.53 | 0.009 | 0.01 | 20.06 | 25.58 | 0.01 |
| 20Cr-25Ni-1 Mo | 0.057 | 0.48 | 1.48 | 0.009 | 0.01 | 19.99 | 25.88 | 1.05 |
| 20Cr-25Ni-3Mo  | 0.064 | 0.52 | 1.47 | 0.009 | 0.01 | 20.16 | 25.52 | 2.97 |
| 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo  | 0.059 | 0.46 | 1.44 | 8     | 0.01 | 19.96 | 25.66 | 5.06 |

addition of Mo  to  steels  and  the  addition of MoO 4  2 ions  to  halide solutions, and to speculate on the role of alloyed Mo in the inhibition of pitting. To  achieve  this,  anodic polarization curves  and ESCA  spectra  were  measured  using  several  combination of  austenitic stainless steels  with and  without Mo,  and  halide solutions with and without MoO4 2ions.

## Experimental

Rolled sheets  of austenitic 20Cr-25Ni steels  containing O to  5 Wt% Mo and pure Mo (99.99 Wt%) were used as  specimens. Analytical compositions of the stainless steels used  are listed in Table 1.  Specimens 40 x 20 x 1.5  (mm) were used  for electro­ chemical polarization measurements, and 18  x  5  x 0.3 (mm) for ESCA  measurements. All of  these  specimens  were  annealed  at  1050 C for  2  hours  in  vacuo  and  then  water-quenched at  O C.

Specimen surfaces were mechanically polished with emery papers  up  to No.  6/0 and  with cloth using  the  diluted suspension  of chromium oxide, degreased  with absolute ethyl alcohol, washed  in distilled water, and  finally dried with air  blasts.  Specimens for the electrochemical polarization measurements were masked with Teflon seal  tapes  ;ttached to  an  epoxy resin  undercoating, except for an  area  1  cm ,  while those for ESCA  measurements were  not masked.

As test solutions, 0.05 to 0.1 M-NaCI, 0.1 M-NaBr, NaCl + Na2MoO4 (NaCl : 0.05 ~ 0.5M, Na2MoO 4  :  0.02 ~ 0.2M) and NaBr + Na2MoO4 (NaBr :  0.1M, Na2MoO 4 : 0.2 ~ 1.0M) were used. All the solutions used were approximately neutral; for example, the  pH  values  of  0.1 M-NaCI,  0.1 M-NaCI + 0.1 M-Na 2  MoO 4 , and 0.1M-NaCI +  0.2M-Na 2 MoO 4 were 6.16, 6.68, and 7.27, respectively. The solutions were deaerated by bubbling pure nitrogen for  more  than  30  minutes.

In  the  measurement of  anodic polarization curves,  the  electrode potential was  regulated by  a  potentiostat and  current recording was made  after holding the  potential for 1  minute at  the  setting of the potential which was increased successively from the corrosion potential in steps  of 25  mV. In this paper, the potentials of test electrodes are represented with respect to the  standard hydrogen electrode (NHE), although the values were measured using a saturated calomel reference electrode. Measurements were  made  at

+1.0

FIGURE 1 -Anodic polarization curves  for pure Mo  in 0.1M-NaCI and 0.1M-NaBr at  25  C.

<!-- image -->

various temperatures in the range 10  to 70  C  under a  stationary­ state  condition.

Surface  analyses  of  specimens which were  treated anodically in chloride solutions were performed by means of ESCA using a Kokusai Denki type KES-X-2001 electron spectrometer. The aluminum Ka1,2 X-ray generated at 1486.6 eV was used for excitation. The  voltage and the current applied to the X-ray tube were 10  kV and  20  mA, respectively. The  specimen container was evacuated to 107 Torr and held at room temperature. The photoelectron spectra of the 2p½  and  2P3/2 levels  for Fe,  Cr,  Ni, and  Cl,  the  3d3/2 and  3d5/2 levels  for Mo,  and  the  1  s level  for  O and C were measured. The binding energies at the peaks of the photoelectron spectra obtained were  corrected by  the  energy of  C 1  s of  the  background spectrum as a  reference, assuming  the  energy difference between the 1  s level for C  and the Fermi level for metallic Pd  to be  285.0 eV. The  valencies of elements in  passive

6

FIGURE 2 -Critical  pitting  temperature  as a function of the Mo content  of  20Cr-25Ni steels in 0.1 M-NaCI.

<!-- image -->

films were  evaluated by  comparing the  binding energies  at  the  peaks of the photoelectron spectra of passive  films and  several  kinds of pure  compounds. 15

## Results

## Anodic  Dissolution of  Pure Mo in NaCl and NaBr Solution

Figure 1  shows anodic polarization curves for pure Mo in 0.1 M-NaCI and  0.1 M-NaBr. Corrosion potentials of  pure  Mo  in  these solutions were nearly equal, that is,  approximately +0.15 V.  The general  dissolution occurred in  both solutions with a  steep  increase in  current as the  electrode potential was changed  from the  corrosion potential to higher values. The general dissolution in this case  is probably caused, not by the pitting dissolution, but by the transpassivation reaction, since  pure  Mo  showed  the  same  mode  of dissolution when anodically polarized in 1  M-Na 2 SO4 from a corrosion potential of  approximately +0.15 V .

## Effect  of  Temperature  on Pitting  of Mo-Containing Steels in  NaCl Solution

The effect of tempera  tu re  on anodic polarization curves of 20Cr-25Ni steels containing 1 to 5  Wt% Mo in 0.1M-NaCI was determined.

Figure 2 shows the relation between the critical pitting temperature and the  Mo  content of  the  steels.  Below these  critical temperatures for the pitting initi\_ation, each steel maintained passivity to about +1.15 V until the transpassive dissolution­ occurred with the accompanying oxygen evolution. The critical pitting temperature (T pitl became higher with increase in Mo content. This  is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The critical temperature depended on  NaCl  concentration too and  were  observed  to  decrease  with increasing concentration.

## Effect  of  Temperature  on Pitting  of Mo-free  Steels in  NaCl+  Na2MoO4  Solutions

It has  previously been  reported that Moo/ions added  to  a NaCl solution act as an effective inhibitor against pitting of austenitic stainless steels. 13 In the present work, the authors investigated the temperature range  in  which MoO4  2 ions  show  an

0.20

FIGURE  3 -Critic.al pitting  temperature  of 20Cr-25Ni  steel as  a functfon of the MoO4 2concentration in 0.1 M-NaCI.

<!-- image -->

effective inhibition, the  change in  pitting potential with the  Mo04  2 concentration, and  the  relation between  the  chloride concentration and  the critical concentration of Mo04  2ions required to  com­ pletely inhibit pitting.

Figure 3  shows  the effect of Mo0 4  2concentration on the critical pitting temperature of  the  20Cr-25Ni steel  in  0.1 M-NaCI. The  critical temperature (T  pit) increased  linearly with the  Mo04  2 concentration. The  linear  relation is expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Pitting on the steel in 0.1 M-NaCI below 70 C  was  completely inhibited when the solution contained Mo04  2 ions  more than 0.2M.  When the  complete  inhibition is achieved,  the  20Cr-25Ni steel retains passivity to about +1.15 V, and then the transpassive dissolution occurs,  accompanying oxygen  evolution.

Figure 4 shows  the change in the pitting potential of the 20Cr-25Ni steel  with the  Mo04  2 concentration in  0.1 M-NaCI  at  50 C.  The  pitting potential was  shifted linearly in  the  noble  direction with increase  in  Mo04  2 concentration up  to  0.12M, over  which pitting was completely inhibited at  50  C.

Figure  5  shows  the  relation between  the  Clconcentration and the  minimum concentration of Mo0 4  2 ions  which is  required to inhibit pitting of  the  20Cr-25Ni steel  at  25  C. The  linear  relation given  in  Equation (3)  is obtained in  the  log-log  plot  between  the  Cl and the  Mo04  2concentration (mol/L):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Interaction  in Pitting  Inhibition Between Mo in Steel and Mo0 4 2 Ions in Solutions

Anodic polarization behavior  of  Mo-containing austentic steels in  NaCl  solutions with Mo04  2 ions  shows that  Mo  in  the  steels and Mo04  2 ions in the  solutions interact with each  other to inhibit pitting. Figure 6 shows  the anodic polarization curves for the 20Cr-25Ni-3Mo steel  in  a 0.1 M-NaCI  + 0.11 M-Na 2  Mo0 4  solution at 50  C  and  the  20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steel  in  the  same  solution at  60  C. Both  curves  show  stable  passivity  up  to  the  transpassive  potential. As a  matter of  course,  pitting was  not  observed  in  either case. As previously stated, both steels used here underwent pitting in 0.1M-NaCI  without Mo04 2 ions  at  50  or  60  C  (Figure 2),  and  the addition of  Mo04  2 ions up to  0.11 M to  0.1 M-NaCI  above  50  C was

0.15

FIGURE 4 -Pittin'!potential of 20Cr-25Ni steel  as  a function  of  the  MoO4 concentration in 0.1 M-NaCI  at 50  C.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 5 -Effect of the Cl concentration on  the minimum concentration  of  MoO4 2ions which  is necessary for  pitting  inhibition  of  20Cr-25Ni  steel at 25  C.

<!-- image -->

insufficient to inhibit pitting of  the  20Cr-25Ni steel  without Mo (Figure 3}. As shown in Figure 6, however, a simultaneous application of Mo  alloying and  Mo0 4  2 addition inhibited pitting effectively, as against  a  separate  use of  these  procedures by  which pitting cannot  be eliminated. These results  suggest that  there  exists  a commo'n feature in the pitting inhibition mechanism between alloyed Mo and  Mo0 4  2 ions added  to  the  solution.

## Pitting  Behavior of  20Cr-25Ni  and 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo  Steels in  NaBr Solution

Anodic polarization curves  for 20Cr-25Ni and  20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steels  in  0.1 M  and  1.0M-NaBr at  25  C are  shown  in  Figure  7.  The effect of  Mo  content on the  pitting potential was scarcely  observed,

FIGURE 6 -Anodic  polarization  curves for  20Cr-25Ni-3Mo and 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steels in a 0.1 M-NaCI + 0.11 M-Na2MoO4 solution at 50 and 60  C.

<!-- image -->

since  the pitting potentials of  both steels  were  almost equal in  the solutions of  the  same  NaBr  concentration. For  example, the  pitting potential for both steels  was  +0.521 V  in  0.1 M-NaBr. The  effect of alloyed Mo, however, was  clearly observed on  the rate of pitting dissolution in  the  solutions. That is,  an  increase  in  the  Mo  content decreases  the rate, since  the anodic polarization curve  of Figure 7 for the 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steel in 0.1 M-NaBr represents a larger polarization than  that for the  20Cr-25Ni steel  in  the  same  solution and  a  temporary decrease  in  current in the  potential range  higher than  the  pitting potential.

\_  Then, the  inhibiting efficiency of MoO 4  2 ions  for  the  bromide pitting of the 20Cr-25Ni steel without Mo was examined in 0.1 M-NaBr  containing MoO 4  2 ions  up  to 1.0M  at  25  C.  Increasing the MoO 4  2 concentration in the solution shifted the pitting potential of the steel in the noble direction and made the polarization of the anodic curve larger. This means  that MoO 4  2 ions  act  as an  inhibitor against  pitting of  the  steel  in  NaBr  solutions. However, the inhibiting efficiency of MoO 4  2 ions for pitting in NaBr  solutions was  extremely low  compared with the  case  of  NaCl solutions. For  example, at  a  temperature of  25  C, it  was  impossible to prevent the initiation of pitting in  0.1 M-NaBr above  +0.97 V, even  if  the  solution contained 1.0M-MoO 4  2 -;  on  the  other hand,  the complete inhibition was achieved in 0.1 M-NaCI by adding only 0.11 M-MoO4  2-\_

## X-ray  Photoelectron Spectra of Passive  Films

The resistance of austenitic stainless steels  against pitting in NaCl  solutions is  expected to  depend on  the  chemical properties of their passive  films formed in the solutions. The  differences in  the chemical composition of surface films between the specimens susceptible or not susceptible to pitting in NaCl solutions were

FIGURE 7  Anodic polarization curves  for 20Cr-25Ni and 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steels  in  0.1 M  and  1  M-NaBr at  25  C.

<!-- image -->

TABLE 2 Passivation Treatments  for  Specimens Used for X-ray  Photoelectron Spectroscopic  Analyses

| Symbol of Specimen   | Material                                                  | Passivation Treatment                                                                                                                    |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A                    | 20Cr-25Ni 20Cr-25Ni.5Mo 20Cr~25Ni 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo 99_99% Mo | Q_ 1M-NaCI (20 C). +0.946 V, 60 min 0.1 M-NaCI (20 C), +0.946 V, 60 min O.lM-NaCI + 0.2M-Na 2Mo0 4 (20 C), Passivated in the air at room |
| B                    |                                                           |                                                                                                                                          |
| C                    |                                                           | +0.946 V, 60 min                                                                                                                         |
| D                    |                                                           | temperature                                                                                                                              |
| Mo sheet             |                                                           | Freshly polished with emery paper                                                                                                        |

examined on  the basis  of the photoelectron spectra. The  stainless steel  specimens used  for the  measurement of  photoelectron spectra are given in  Table 2.  Specimen A  was  a  Mo-free  20Cr-25Ni steel  on which pitting occurred in a  NaCl solution. Specimen B  was  the 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steel  which was  resistant to  pitting in  the  solution. Specimen C  was  a  Mo-free 20Cr-25Ni steel  which was  prevented from pitting by  adding MoO 4  2 ions to the  solution. Specimen D was  the  20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steel  with air-formed films which was used for comparison. The  values  of binding energy at  the  peaks  of  the photoelectron spectra for the specimens listed in Table 2  1md reference  pure  compounds are  tabulated in  Table  3.

## Discussion

## Anodic  Polarization Behavior  of  Pure Mo in  Neutral  Halide  Solutions

It  had  been  said  that  the  passive film of  pure  Mo  was composed of MoO2 and the reaction product of the transpassivation was MoO 4 2 ions. l  6--l  S Accordingly, the transpassivation reaction for Mo  in  a  neutral solution with pH  higher than  6,  and  its  equilibrium potential, may be  represented by the following equations, respec­ tively: 19

TABLE 3 Binding Energies for  the  Peaks Observed  in the  X~ray Photoelectron Spectra

|                                   | Electrons                              | Electrons                              | Electrons                            | Electrons                   | Electrons                    | Electrons                              | Electrons          | Electrons                    | Electrons                    | Electrons          | Electrons             | Electrons                          | Electrons                            | Electrons                 | Electrons                    |
|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------|
|                                   |                                        |                                        |                                      |                             |                              |                                        | Mo 3dJl2 and 3ds[2 | Mo 3dJl2 and 3ds[2           | Mo 3dJl2 and 3ds[2           | Mo 3dJl2 and 3ds[2 |                       |                                    |                                      |                           |                              |
|                                   | Fe 2PJ/2                               | Fe 2PJ/2                               | Cr 2PJ/2                             | Cr 2PJ/2                    |                              |                                        |                    |                              | Oxide                        | Oxide              | Metal                 |                                    |                                      | Cl 2Pl/2 and              | Cl 2Pl/2 and                 |
| Specimen                          | Oxide                                  | Metal                                  | Oxide                                | Metal                       | Oxide                        | Oxide                                  | Metal              | 3dJ/2                        | 3d5/2                        | 3d312              | 3d5/2                 | Q                                  | Q                                    | 2P1/2                     | 2PJ/2                        |
| A G C D                           | 712.9( 1) 712.1( I) 712.2( I) 712_2(!) | 708.0(2) 707_7( 2) 707.8(2) 707.4( 2 ) | 577.4(!) sn.1' 1 ) 577.6(I) 577_5(l) | 574. l(J) 574.8()) 574.2(]) | 861.l(l) 861.6( 2 ) 862.6(2) | 855.5(1) 856.3( 1 ) 856.il) 957.4< 2 ) | 853.fi(I)          | 235.sCl) 235_5( 3) 235.i 2 ) | 232.2(1) 232j I) 232.2(1)    | 230.9(3) 230.i')   | 227 a< 2 ) 227_7( 2 ) | 532.1(3) 532.0(3) 5325(3) 531_8(1) | 530.S(l) 530_5(\) 530.8(1 I 530.0(J) | 199.B(J) 202.00) 201.8(3) | 198_2( 1 ) 200.i I) 200_8(]) |
| Mo sheet Mo03 Na2Mo04 • 2H20 NaCl |                                        |                                        |                                      |                             |                              |                                        |                    | 235.8(2) 235_3( 1)           | 231.0(2) 232_7(l) 232_2( 1 ) | 227_9(1)           |                       | 533_3Pl                            | 531.3(!) 531. 1< 1 ) 530.7( 1 )      | 200_0(3)                  | 198_5(I)                     |

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As  the  pH  of  0.1 M-NaCI used  is  6.16, MoO 4  2 ions  should  be more stable  than MoO 2  in  the  potential region above  -0.199 V,  assuming (l Moo 4  2 =  106 . It is  possible to  assume  that the  oxide film of MoO 3  is  formed on the Mo  electrode in the potential region of transpassivity according to  Equation (6):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The MoO 3  film, however, even  if  formed in this solution, will be porous and not depress the anodic dissolution of the electrode because  the oxide MoO 3  dissolves  as  HMoO4or MoO 4  2 ions  in solutions with pH  higher  than  3.7 . 19

The  general  dissolution of  pure  Mo  observed in  0.1 M-NaCI  and 0.1 M-NaBr  when  polarized in  the  noble  direction from the  corrosion potential (about +0.15 V) is thought to be the transpassive dissolution caused by the reaction of Equation (4). The passive region of the 20Cr-25Ni steels containing 1 to 5  Wt% Mo in 0.1 M-NaCI corresponds to the transpassive region of pure Mo {because  the  corrosion potentials of  these  steels  in  the  solution are about +0.1 V). MoO 4  2 ions,  therefore, should be  formed if  these steels are dissolved  by  pitting in  their passive  regions.

## Pitting Inhibition Mechanism  of  Mo0 4 2 -

## lons Added  to Neutral  NaCl Solutions

On  addition of  MoO 4 lions  to  NaCl  solutions, the  following 2 pitting inhibition mechanisms may be considered for austenitic stainless  steels  without Mo: (  1)  MoO 4 2 ions  are  adsorbed preferen­ tially on  the  steel  surface  and  preclude the  adsorption of Cl ions, and (2) the MoO 2  film is  formed on the steel surface by the reduction of MoO 4  2ions, and this film prevents the chloride attack. Since  the  pH  values  of  NaCl  +  Na 2 MoO4  solutions used  are approximately 7,  the equilibrium potential for the  reaction repre­ sented  by  Equation (4) is -0.251 Vas  calculated from Equation (5). Consequently, the  reduction of  MoO 4  2 ions  to  MoO 2  is improbable in  the  potential region of  passivity for the  20Cr-25Ni steel,  because corrosion potentials of the steel in NaCl +  Na2  MoO4 solutions, which are  approximately +0.05 V,  are  higher than the  equilibrium potential for Equation (4). For  the  20Cr-25N  i  steel  passivated in  a 0.1 M-NaCI +  0.2M-Na 2MoO4 solution, the X-ray photoelectron spectra  studies  showed  that Mo  is  oxidized to about Mo(VI) in  the passive film, as  mentioned later. Consequently, the mechanism which assumes  the formation of  the  Mo(IV) oxide, MoO2, cannot be  considered valid. On  the  other hand,  the  mechanism based on  the adsorption of MoO 4  2ions is  more likely to be  valid, because  the linear relation, represented by Equation (3), between the logarithmic concentration of Cl and  the  logarithmic concentration of MoO 4  2 which is required to inhibit pitting, suggests the adsorption of MoO 4  2ions according to the Freundrich-type adsorption isotherm. Judging from the coefficient (  1.17) of the logarithmic term in Equation (3), the inhibiting efficiency of MoO 4  2 ions to the chloride pitting of  austenitic stainless steels  is thought to  be  lower than that of  NO3ions  but  higher than  that of acetate  ions.  20

## Interaction Between  Molybdenum in  Steel and Mo0 4 2 Ions in  Solution

The common features observed in the pitting inhibition by alloying Mo  in  steels  and  adding MoO4  2 ions  to  chloride solutions are summarized as follows:

1.  The pitting potential is  shifted in the  noble direction with increase in Mo  content of steels or in MoO 4  zconcentration in solutions.
2. It is  impossible to inhibit the initiation of pitting by  either method at elevated temperatures. The critical temperature for pitting initiation becomes higher with increasing Mo content in steels or  MoO 4 2 concentration in  solutions.

3. Pitting of  the  Mo-containing steels  can  be  inhibited by  small additions of MoO 4  2 ions to solutions by which pitting of the Mo-free steel  can not  be  suppressed.

Consequently, it is  reasonable to assume  the existence of a common process in  mechanisms of pitting inhibition by  the  above two methods. Since the formation of MoO 4  2 ions, as  previously mentioned, can be  expected in the initial stage  of\_ pitting of t~: Mo-containing steel, it  is  presumed that the  adsorption of  MoO4 ions  on the active sites  within pits plays an  important role in  the inhibition of pitting. That is, the adsorption process  of MoO4  2 ions,  which suppress  the pit growth, is  thought to  be  common in both methods.

## Pitting  of  Mo-containing Steels in NaBr  Solutions

Although the  rates  of pitting dissolution of  the  20Cr-25N  i steel without Mo in NaBr solutions is  decreased by the addition of MoO 4  2 ions,  the  inhibiting efficiency of  the  ions  to  bromide pitting is  extremely low  and  an  almost tenfold addition of MoO 4  2 ions  is required for complete inhibition of  bromide pitting compared with the  case  for the  chloride pitting. The  amount of  MoO4  2 ions  which are  concentrated within a pit at  the  initial stage of  pitting of  the  Mo containing steel is  thought to be  almost equal in  both cases for chloride and  bromide solutions. Consequently, even  the  20Cr-25Ni5Mo steel, which shows higher resistance to pitting in NaCl solutions, seems to  be liable  to  pitting in  NaBr  solutions.

## Oxidation States of  Constituents of  Passive Film  Formed  in  Chloride  Solutions

Oxidation states  of the  film constituents of  specimens A,  B,  C, and  D  in  Table 2  were  estimated from the  values  of  binding energy at  the peaks  of the  photoelectron spectra. The  oxidation states  of Fe,  Cr,  Ni,  and  O  in  surface films were  determined on  the  basis  of our previous data in which the photoelectron spectra for the passivation 18Cr-8Ni steel and various kinds of pure oxides, hydroxides, and oxihydroxides were studied in detail. 15 The oxidation states of Mo  and Cl  were determined from the  photo­ electron spectra obtained from pure  Mo,  molybdenum compounds, and  sodium chloride in  the  present study. liternture values  for the photoelectron spectra of  several  molybdenum compounds were  also used  for  comparison. 21

The characteristic features of photoelectron spectra for specimens A, B,  C,  and  D,  and  the  oxidation states  of their passive film constituents are summarized as follows:

- Fe.  A strong  peak  at  about 712  eV  which is usually observed  on the Fe  2p3;2 spectra  of  these  specimens  can  be assigned  to  oxidized Fe  [approximately Fe(III)] in  the  passive  films.

Cr. A  strong peak  at  about 577  eV  for the  Cr  2p3;2 spectra  of these specimens can be  assigned to oxidized Cr [approximately Cr( 111)] in  the  passive films.

- Ni. Counting rates of Ni 2P3/2 spectra for the stainless steel specimens were  very low, suggesting that the Ni content of their passive  films is  extremely low. The  strong peak  at  about 856  eV  is thought to result from oxidized Ni [approximately Ni(II)] in  the passive films. 15 A  weak  peak  at about 862  eV  can  be assigned  to  the peak  due  to  "shake-up" in  the  Ni(II) oxide.
0. 0 1  s  spectra of passive  films always  have two  peaks  at  about 532 and  531  eV,  which are  attributed to  oxygen in  the  M-OH  (M: metal element) or O-OH bond and that in the M-O bond, respectively. 15 Since the intensity of the 531  eV  peak  is  stronger than that of  the  532  eV  peak  in  O  1  s spectra  of  specimens A,  B,  and C, the passive film formed by the anodic oxidation should be composed of  an  oxide which contains a  small  amount of  hydroxyl groups.

Cl.  The binding energy of Cl  2p3;2 electrons for  specimen A, 198.2 eV, is  almost equal to that for NaCl powder, 198.5 eV. However, the values of binding energy for Cl  2P3/2 electrons of specimens  8  and  C, which are  around 200.2 eV,  are approximately 2 eV higher than those for NaCl powder, suggesting that weakly adsorbed Cl 2  or Cl  exists in  the  specimen surface. Such  Cl2  or  Cl may  be  produced by. prolonged exposure of  the  specimens  to  X-ray radiation. 2  2

Mo. Mo  3d3;2-3d5;2 spectra  obtained from specimens  B and  D show four peaks at about 235.5, 232.2, 230.9, and 227.8 eV. Among  these  peaks,  the  230.9 and  the  227.8 eV  peaks are thought to result from metallic Mo  or  extremely lower valent Mo,  because they  correspond to  the  peaks which appeared  at  231.0  and  227.9  eV in  the  Mo  3d312-3d5;2 spectra of pure Mo  which were  measured immediately after polishing with emery paper.  The  other  two  peaks at  235.5 and  232.2 eV  correspond to  the  peaks  observed at  about 235.8 and  232.7 eV  in  Mo  3d3;2-3d5;2 spectrum obtained from powders  of  MoO 3  and  Na2 MoO4 · 2H2O. Consequently, Mo  in  the passive  film of the 20Cr-25Ni-5Mo steel should be  oxidized to approximately Mo(VI) when subjected to anodic oxidation or air-oxidation.

A  very clear  spectrum of  Mo  3d3;2-3d5/2 photoelectrons was obtained from specimen C, i.e., the  20Cr-25Ni steel  treated in  the NaCl  + Na2MoO 4  solution. Since  specimen  C contains no  Mo  in  the matrix, the spectrum of Mo obtained is  thought to result from MoO 4  2 ions  adsorbed or included in the passive  film from the solution used. Two  peaks are observed  at  235.6  and  232.3  eV  on  the spectrum, and  these  two peaks  agree  with the  235.6 and  the  232.2 eV  peaks  in  the Mo  3d3;2-3d5;2 spectrum for  Na2MoO4 · 2H2O powder. It is,  therefore, likely that  the  passive film which is formed by  anodic oxidation in  a  NaCl  solution with MoO 4  zions  contains Mo(VI).

Finally, it  is concluded that Mo  in  passive films exists  as Mo(VI) ions in both cases  of the pitting inhibition, that is,  the alloying addition of  Mo  in  steels and  the  addition of  MoO 4  2 ions  to  chloride solutions.

## Summary

It  was found that MoO 4  2 ions  added  to  a neutral NaCl  solution acts  effectively as a pitting inhibitor for  the  20Cr-25N  i steel without Mo.  Both  pit  initiation and  growth are suppressed  by  small  additions of MoO 4  2 ions. Several similar effects are observed in both methods for pitting inhibition, that is,  alloying Mo  in  steels  and adding  MoO 4  2 ions  to  chloride solutions. Moreover, the  multiplied effect in the inhibition of pitting between Mo in the steel and MoO 4  2 ions  in  the  solution is recognized.

From results of the surface analysis by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (  ESCA), it is  found that Mo(VI) ions in  the  passive film participate in  the  inhibition of  the  chloride pitting of  austenitic stainless steel  by  alloyed Mo  or  added  MoO 4  2 ions,  or  both.

On  the  basis of  these  facts, it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that the resistance  against  pitting of  Mo-containing austenitic stainless  steels in  neutral halide solutions results  from the inhibition of  pit  growth by the  adsorption of MoO 4  2 ions  which is  concentrated in  pits at the  initial stage of  pitting.

## Acknowledgment

The  authors are  indebted to  S.  Soma  of  Tohoku University for his technical assistance  throughout this  work. Thanks  are also due  to Professor S. Ikeda and Dr. K. Kishi of Osaka  University for the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analyses.

## References

1.  J.M. Kolotyrkin. Corrosion, Vol. 19,  p.  261  (1963).
2. N.  Tomashov, G.  Chernova, and  0. Marcova. Corrosion, Vol. 20,  p.  166t (  1964).
3. V.  Hospodaruk and  J.  V.  Petrocelli. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 113,  p.  878  (1966).
4. J.  Horvath and  H.  H.  Uhlig. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 115,  p. 791  (1968).
5. A.  P. Bond  and  E. A.  Lizlovs. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 115,  p. 1130(1968).
6. P.  Forchhammer and  H.  J.  Engel!.  Werkst. u.  Korr., Vol. 20,  p. 1 (1969).
7. R.  J.  Birgham. Corrosion, Vol. 28,  p.  177  (1972).
8. R. J. Brigham and E.  W. Tozer. Corrosion, Vol. 29, p. 33 (1973).
9. M.  A.  Streicher. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 103,  p.  375  (1956).
10. H. H. Uhlig and J. Wulff. Trans. AIME, Vol. 135, p. 494 (  1939).
11. A.  P. Bond.  J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 120,  p.  603  (1973).
12. K. Sugimoto, K. Kishi, S. Ikeda, and Y. Sawada. Extended Abstracts of the  75th Meeting of  the  Japan  Inst. Metals,  p.  92 (1974).
13. K.  Sugimoto and  Y.  Sawada.  Boshoku Gijutsu, Vol. 20,  p.  264 (1971).
14. T.  Suzuki, M.  Yamabe,  and  Y.  Kitamura. Corrosion, Vol. 29,  p. 18  (1973).
15. K.  Sugimoto, K.  Kishi, S.  Ikeda,  and  Y.  Sawada.  J. Japan  Inst. Metals,  Vol. 38,  p.  54  (1974).
16. M.  Koenig  and  H.  Goehr. Ber.  Bunsenges.  Phys.  Chem.,  Vol.  67, p.  837  (  1963).
17. L.  L.  Wikstrom and  Ken  Nobe. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 116, p.  525  (  1969).
18.  Th. Heumann and G. Hauck. Z. Metallkde., Vol. 56, p.  75 (1965).
19. E. Deltombe, N. De Zoubov and M. Pourbaix. Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in  Aqueous Solutions, Ed. by M. Pourbaix, Pergamon  Press, London, p.  272  (1966).
20. H.  P.  Leckie  and  H.  H.  Uhlig. J.  Electrochem. Soc.,  Vol. 113,  p. 1261  (1966).
21. W.  E.  Swartz, Jr.  and  D.  M.  Hercules. Anal. Chem.,  Vol.  43,  p. 1774  (1971).
22. K.  Kishi and  S.  Ikeda. J.  Phys.  Chem., Vol. 78,  p.  107  (1974).