movable may have caused  minor  differences in  various runs.  However, it  is  felt that  the  effects of the  major anion, OH-, would override those  of  other trace  inert anions.

## Acknowledgment

This research  was  supported  by the  Advanced Research  Projects Agency of  the  Department  of  Defense as part  of the ARPA Coupling  Program on  StressCorrosion Cracking  (ARPA  Order  878).

Manuscript  submitted April  19,  1968;  revised manuscript  received  July 11, 1968.  This paper was  presented  at the Montreal Meeting,  Oct. 6-11, 1968,  as Paper  390.

Any  discussion of this  paper  will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to be  published  in the June  1969 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  S. Schuldiner, T. B. Warner, and B. J. Piersma, This  Journal, 114, 343  (1967).
3.  M.  J.  Pryor and M.  Cohen, ibid., 100,  203  (1953).
2.  S. Schuldiner, B. J. Piersma,  and  T. B. Warner, ibid., 113, 573  (1966).
4.  S. Schuldiner and C. M.  Shepherd, ibid., 115, 916 (1968).
6.  C. L. Foley,  J.  Kruger,  and  C. J. Bechtoldt, This Journal, 114, 994  (1967).
5.  J.  Thomas  and T. Nurse, Brit. Corrosion J.,  2, 13 (1967).
7.  S.  Schuldiner, ibid., 115, 897  (1968).

## Anodic  Polarization  of Austenitic  Stainless Steels in Chloride Media

## A. P. Bond*  and E.  A. Lizlovs

Research  Laboratory, Climax  Molybdenum  Company  o~ Michigan, Ann Arbor,  Michigan

## ABSTRACT

Potentiodynamic polarization experiments  were  performed in 0.1N hydrochloric acid  and in 1N  sodium chloride with austenitic alloys  containing 18 to  20%  Cr, 13 to  39%  Ni,  0 to  5%  Mo,  and balance  Fe.  The pitting potentials varied  consistently with alloy  content  and correlated well  with  the  results of exposure  tests in 0.33M  ferric chloride. Increasing the molybdenum and nickel  contents increased the resistance to pitting; however, decreasing the carbon and nitrogen  contents  also increased  the resistance to pitting. Critical current densities for  passivity decreased  sharply  at all nickel  levels with  increases in  the  molybdenum content.

One of the  most important contributions of molybdenum  alloying  additions to stainless steels  is the resulting increase  in  the resistance to pitting corrosion.  Although this  behavior  has been known  for  a long  time, very  little quantitative information is  available.  Recent work on potentiodynamic determination of  pitting potentials (1-6)  suggests that  this technique should be  very useful  in determining  the relative pitting resistances of  various alloys.

The  compositions  of all  alloys  produced for this investigation are  shown in Table I.

The  ingots  were  hot-forged  and  hot-rolled to a thickness of 0.76  cm  and then  cold-rolled to  0.38  cm. The 13%  nickel steels were annealed at  1120~ for  1  hr and water-quenched. The 39%  nickel  steels and the high-purity alloys  were annealed  at 1150~ for 1 hr and  water-quenched.

The electrodes for  the  potentiodynamic studies were mounted in  acrylic plastic with a single exposed surface parallel to the rolling plane.  Electrical contact was made by soft  soldering a nickel wire  to  the  back of the electrode. Soldering was accomplished  quickly (about  5 sec) to minimize heat input,  although  no metallurgical changes  would be expected  even if  the test surface of  the  electrode were heated  to  the  melting point  of  the  solder  (190~ for  a few seconds. Contact between the solder  or lead  wire and the electrolyte

Table I. Compositions of  alloys studied

0.040

0.030

0.033

0.012

A  study  was undertaken to  learn whether or  not  the concept  of a pitting potential is  valid  and useful  in characterizing the resistance to pitting corrosion of molybdenum-containing  stainless steels.  Once the utility of  the  technique was established  the next  step was to determine  in  detail  how variations in  molybdenum content affect the  resistance of  various stainless steels to  pitting in  environments containing chlorides. In achieving  this  goal,  it  seemed  desirable to use stainless  teels of widely  differing nickel  contents so that  possible nickel-molybdenum interactions could  be detected.

## Procedures

Two  series  of austenitic stainless steels, one  containing about 13% nickel  and the other  39%  nickel, were induction-melted in an argon atmosphere  and cast  in air. Each series was  prepared  using  the  split heat  technique. In this technique, the  base  composition is  melted  and  part of  the  melt  is  cast  into an ingot. To the balance  of the melt,  the required  molybdenum addition  is made  and  the next ingot  is cast.  This process  is  repeated  until a series of  the  desired compositions is  cast. By  this  procedure, the residual and impurity elements, which  were  intended to  be in  the range  commonly present in commercial stainless steels, were held  essentially constant within each  series.

Three high-purity alloys  were  also prepared as separate heats  by melting  and casting in  vacuum.

* Electrochemical  Society Active  Member.

| Cr, %   | Ni, %                 | Me, %                        | Mn, %   | Si,%   | C, %   | N, %   |
|---------|-----------------------|------------------------------|---------|--------|--------|--------|
|         | High-nickelaustenitic |                              |         | series |        |        |
| 19.97   | 39.09                 | 0.025                        | 1.21    | 0.46   | 0.058  |        |
| NA:     | NA                    | 0.97                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | NA     |
| NA      | NA                    | 3.03                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | NA     |
| 20.01   | 39.13                 | 4.85                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | 0.039  |
|         |                       | Low-nickel austenitic        |         | series |        |        |
| 17.67   | 13.57                 | 1.99                         | 1.84    | 0.45   | 0.025  | 0.030  |
| NA      | NA                    | 2.45                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | NA     |
| NA      | NA                    | 2.93                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | NA     |
| NA      | NA                    | 3.37                         | NA      | NA     | NA     | NA     |
| 17.60   | 13.50                 | 3.89                         | 1.72    | 0.53   | 0.027  | 0.033  |
|         |                       | High-purity austeniticseries |         |        |        |        |
| 17.86   | 16.13                 | 0.067                        | --      | 0.09   | 0.002  | 0.01O  |
| 18.01   | 16.25                 | 2.48                         | --      | 0,08   | 0.003  | 0.012  |
| 18.07   | 16.17                 | 4.99                         | --      | 0.09   | 0.004  | 0.012  |

was  excluded by  the plastic  and a  glass  tube.  The exposed surface (0.5 x 0.6 cm) was polished  using standard  metallographic techniques, ending with the distilled water slurry  of 0.3~ alumina.  For  the  pitting potential measurements, the electrode  was  masked with electroplater's tape (Scotch 470)  except for a circular area  0.3  cm in  diameter.

The  potentiodynamic  scanning experiments were performed  using  standard  equipment and techniques. The  platinum auxiliary electrode was  isolated from the test  solution by means  of a glass  frit. The  solutions  used were argon-saturated 0.1N HC1 and  1.0M NaC1. All  potential measurements were  made using  a saturated calomel  reference electrode. Work  reported in  the  literature (3,4,6) indicates that  pitting potentials measured on stainless steels are quite  dependent on experimental  procedure.  To  minimize the effects of the  prior  history of  the  electrodes, the  potential scans were  started  with --0.Tv  in the active  region.  By scanning  into  the  passive  potential region, the  passive film was  formed in  situ under  reproducible  conditions. Scanning  rates  in  most tests were 600 mv/hr up to potentials of about 0.2-0.3v less  noble  than the expected  pitting potential. At this  potential, the  scanning rate  was  decreased  to 60 mv/hr.  In a few tests, this  procedure  was  varied  to determine  the effect of change in scanning  rate  on the observed  pitting potential.

Since  crevice corrosion on the unmasked  electrodes did not occur  until  potentials much  more noble  than the primary passivation potential were reached,  unmasked electrodes were used to  determine  the  critical cur.rent  density  and  primary passivation potential. The  unmasked  electrodes also allowed more  precise determination of electrode  area than did the masked electrodes.

The critical current densities  (maximum anodic current  density  reached in the active  region) and primary  passivation  potentials (potential at  which the critical current density is reached) measured  are shown  in Fig.  2 and 3 and Table II.  Examination  of the data for both series  of austenitic alloys  reveals that  increases in molybdenum  content  decreased  the critical current  density for  passivation. This behavior is especially evident  in the steels  containing  39% nickel  and in  the high-purity alloys  because these alloys  cover  a wider range of molybdenum  contents. Comparison of the  data  for  the  three  series of alloys, at  roughly  the  same molybdenum  contents, shows that ~he critical currents are  in  the  same range.

The  changes in molybdenurn  content  within the range  studied in  the  13.5%  nickel  alloys had no effect on  the primary passivation  potentials (Epp), which were  close  to --0.26v.  No  pronounced variation of passivation potential with molybdenum  content  was

Exposure tests were performed  in 0.33M  FeCI~ dissolved  in  0.01N HC1.  This  medium  gave a chloride ion concentration equal  to  that  in  the  1.0M NaC1  medium used in  the polarization measurements.  Test coupons, 2.5 X  3.8 X  0.3 cm, were suspended  in the  unstirred solution by means  of a glass  rod through a 0.64-cm hole in each specimen.  In all  experiments, the temperature was 24 ~  +\_ I~

## Results

Measurements in 0.1N HCl.--The  initial anodic  polarization measurements in 0.1N  HC1  disclosed that crevice  corrosion  occurred  at the interface between the  metal  and the  plastic mount.  Masking the  electrode surface  with electroplaters tape usually  eliminated this  crevice corrosion. These effects are illustrated in Fig.  1.  Microscopic examination  of  the  electrodes after the  runs  depicted in  Fig.  1 showed that  neither electrode  was  pitted, confirming  that  the rise  in current for the unmasked  electrode  starting at about 0.1v was  due to crevice attack  and the rise  in current  at potentials above 0.8  for  the  masked electrode was the start of  the  normal  transpassive region.

Fig. 1.  Polarization curves  obtained on masked and unmasked electrodes  for the  17.6%  Cr-13.6% Ni-2.45%  Mo austenitic  stainless steel in argon-saturated  0.1N  hydrochloric  acid. The  potential was  scanned from  negative toward  positive.  The  arrows  indicate the potential  at which  the scanning rate was  decreased  from 600 to 60 my/hr.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2. Critical  current  densities obtained  from potentiodynamic scans  at 600  mv/hr in argon-saturated  0.1N  hydrochloric  acid on the 16.6%  Cr-13.5%  Ni steels.

<!-- image -->

u~

Fig. 3. Critical  current  densities and  primary passivation  potentials  obtained  from potentiodynamic scans  at  600  mv/hr in argonsaturated  0.1N  hydrochloric acid  on  the  20% Cr-39% Ni  steels.

<!-- image -->

Table I#. Primary passivation potentials (Epp) and critical current densities (Icr)  for the  18% Cr-16% Ni  high-purity alloys obtained from potentiodynamic polarization scans  at 600 mv/hr  in argon-saturated  HCI

| Molyb- denum content,   | 0.1N HC1     | 0.1N HC1       | 1.0N HC1     | 1.0N HC1       |
|-------------------------|--------------|----------------|--------------|----------------|
| %                       | /or, ma/cm ~ | Epp, v vs. SCE | /cr, ma/cm 2 | Epp, v vs. SCE |
| 0.067                   | 0.42         | -- 0.265       | --~          | --'r           |
| 2.48                    | 0.050        | --0.279        | 1.7          | --0.250        |
| 4.99                    | 0.012        | --0.250        | 0,33         | --0.275        |

- a  NO passivation occurred for these steels  in 1N  HC1.

found  in  the high-purity series. In the 39% nickel series, increasing molybdenum  did shift Epp  slightly in  the  active  direction. On the  other  hand,  comparison of  the  39%  nickel series with  the  13.5%  nickel series suggests that  increasing nickel content  shifted Epp in the  noble  direction.

Because of the interference of crevice  corrosion at the interface between the metal and  the  plastic mount, these  electrodes could  not be used to obtain pitting potentials. Figure  4 shows a typical potentiodynamic scanning  curve  obtained  on a masked electrode  in 0.1N HC1  for  a metal  susceptible to pitting corrosion. Note that  the decrease  in  scanning rate  at 0.1v leads  to a  sharp drop in the passive  current measured.  The pitting potential is  taken  as  the  potential at which the passive  current rises  sharply. Microscopic examination revealed  that  pits  were visible after this  sharp  rise in  current and were not  present when the electrode was examined before  the  current rise. Crevice  corrosion, in  addition to  the  normal  pitting  corrosion, was frequently initiated under  the  tape mask  after  the onset  of pitting. For this  reason  the magnitude of the corrosion current  after  the onset of pitting was  not  a reliable indicator of the degree of  pitting  corrosion. In a  few  tests, only crevice corrosion  was  observed,  and no  true  pits  appeared on the free  electrode surface. The  data  from  these tests  were therefore rejected. No  potential scan was continued  more than 20 mv  beyond the potential at which passivity broke down, even if  the breakdown was due only  to  crevice corrosion.

Most  alloys studied  were quite  resistant to pitting in 0.1N  HC1 (Table III). None  of the high-purity alloys  exhibited a  pitting potential less  noble than

Fig. 4.  Polarization curve  obtained for  17.6% Cr-13.6% Ni1.99% Mo austenitic stainless  steel  in argon-saturated 0.1N  hydrochloric  acid.  The scanning  rate  was 600  mv/hr  from  --0.3 to 0.1v;  it  was  decreased to  60 mv/hr  from  0.1v to the pitting  potential.

<!-- image -->

Table  III. Pitting  potentials  obtained from  potentiodynamic polarization  scans in argon-saturated O.1N HCI

a

|                    | Nominal composition,%   | Nominal composition,%   | Pitting potential, a   |
|--------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|
| Cr                 | Ni                      | Mo                      | v vs. SCE              |
| High-nickel series | High-nickel series      | High-nickel series      | High-nickel series     |
| 20                 | 39                      | 0.0                     | 0.64                   |
| 20                 | 39                      | 1                       | NP b                   |
| 20                 | 39                      | 3                       | NP                     |
| 20                 | 39                      | 5                       | NP                     |
| Imw-nickel series  | Imw-nickel series       | Imw-nickel series       | Imw-nickel series      |
| 18                 | 14                      | 2                       | 0.39                   |
| 18                 | 14                      | 2.5                     | NP                     |
| 18                 | 14                      | 3                       | NP                     |
|                    | 14                      | 3.5                     | NP                     |
| 18 18              | 14                      | 4                       | NP                     |
| High-purity series | High-purity series      | High-purity series      | High-purity series     |
| 18                 | 16                      | 0                       | NP                     |
|                    | 16                      | 2.5                     | NP                     |
| i8                 | 16                      | 5                       | NP                     |

0.8v.  Only the  39%  nickel steel without  molybdenum and the 13%  nickel  steel with 2%  molybdenum  displayed pitting potentials less  noble than the transpassive range. Small  increases in  molybdenum content of the two  susceptible alloys  displaced  the pitting potential beyond 0.8v. In  addition, increasing the nickel  content  from  13.5  to 39% also  increased the resistance to  pitting corrosion.

Measurements in 1M NaCI.--An  experimental program  similar  to that performed in 0.1N  HC1 was undertaken in 1.0M  NaC1. The literature reports that increasing the chloride  ion concentration increases the  pitting susceptibility of  stainless steels, but  changing  the  pH  from 1 to  7 does not  affect pitting potentials (6).  However,  this increase in pH  did suppress the  critical current for  passivity to  such  an  extent  that it  could not be precisely measured on many  of the steels tested. For this  reason,  the currents  and potentials corresponding to the  active-passive transition are not reported.

In  contrast to  the  behavior observed  in  0.1N HC1, in 1M NaC1 many  specimens  showed  current  blips  at potentials lower  than  those  at  which continuous pitting occurred.  Microscopic  examinations of electrodes on which  momentary  current  increases  had  occurred showed  some  very small pits.  Thus, these current blips appear  to  correspond to  the  initiation f  a pit that then repassivates  almost immediately. The  pits  thus formed are quite  small and do not grow. A  similar phenomenon has  been  described by Schwenk  (2).

To  check the significance of these current  blips, some specimens  were subjected to  the  usual  potential scan  until well-defined current pulses  were obtained. At this point  the  scan  was stopped, and the  specimen was  held at a  constant  potential while  the  current was  recorded. The current pulses continued, becoming less  frequent and  smaller until they  died  away  completely in  a few hours.  Holding electrodes at  constant potentials, above those at which  repassivating pits formed, for at least  24  hr did not cause a  pit  to propagate  in any case.  It  is  possible that  these  repassivating pits  are associated with extremely  small regions  of considerable composition  differences from the  bulk  composition and that  after these  regions are removed the pits  are too small  to propagate  at the potential in  question. Since  this type  of  repassivating pit  did not always occur on a  given electrode and was never  observed  to  lead  to  a propagating pit  if  the potential scan was  stopped,  the potential at which pits  not only initiated, but continued  to grow  was taken  as  the most important pitting potential.

To determine the  influence of  scanning rate on these measurements,  the  13.5%  nickel steel containing 2.9% molybdenum was studied at  various scanning rates in 1.0M  NaC1. The results  (Table IV) indicate that  the pitting potentials tend  to shift in  the  noble  direction

Table  IV. Pitting  potentials  obtained  at various  scanning  rates on the 17.6% Cr-13.5% Ni-2.93%  Mo  alloy  in 1.0M  sodium  chloride

Pitting potential,

| Scanning rate, mv/hr            | Repassivating pitting potential, v vs. SCE   |   Pitting v vs. SCE |
|---------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| 2000                            | 0.29                                         |               0.43  |
| 600                             | 0.32                                         |               0.47  |
| 600 from --0.7to + 0.3v then 60 | 0.29                                         |               0.525 |
|                                 | --                                           |               0.495 |
| 600 from --0.7to + 0.3v then 20 | 0.31                                         |               0.655 |

as  the  scanning rate  is  decreased. The actual polarization curves obtained at  the  highest and lowest scanning rates  (Fig. 5 and 6) indicate that  scanning rate  affects several aspects of  the  measurements. The higher  scanning rate  gives  rise  to a  higher  active  anodic dissolution peak, which  is shifted  toward more  noble potentials. As expected, the  faster the  scan, the  higher the passive  current. As  the pitting potential is approached,  the  current blips  corresponding to repassi-

Fig.  5.  Anodic  polarization  curves  obtained  on  a  masked electrode far the 17.6% Cr-13.6% Ni-2.93%  Mo austenitic  stainless steel in argon-saturated 1.0M sodium chloride. The scanning rate  was 2000  mv/hr  in the positive  direction.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  6.  Anodic  polarization  curves obtained  on  a  masked electrode for the  17.6% Cr-13.6% Ni-2.93%  Mo stainless steel in  argonsaturated  I.OM  sodium chloride.  The  scanning rate was  600  mv/hr up  to 0.3v and  thereafter, 20 mv/hr.

<!-- image -->

vating  pits  are much  larger  and more  numerous at the  faster scan.  The potential at  which  the  growth of stable pits begins  is  much  more sharply defined at  the lower scan  rate  and occurs  at more noble  potentials.

The  results of the pitting potential measurements on the 13 and 39%  nickel steels are  shown  in  Fig.  7. The  results obtained  on the 13.5%  nickel  austenitic steels confirm  that  1.0M NaC1  is  indeed  a more severe pitting electrolyte than 0.1N  HC1.  It is also clear that  increasing molybdenum  content  up to at  least 3.5% improves  pitting resistance of  these  alloys. However,  at 3.9%  molybdenum  the pitting potential was tending toward  lower  values.

The  anomalous behavior  of the 3,9%  molybdenum steel may be related to its microstructure. Delta  ferrite is  present in  the  alloys containing over 2.9%  molybdenum, with  the  3.9% molybdenum alloy containing an appreciable amount. It  has been reported  by others (7) that  delta  ferrite is  detrimental to resistance to pitting corrosion. All the 39% nickel  alloys  were completely austenitic.

The  results on  the 39% nickel  alloys  were  very similar to  those  obtained in  0.1N HC1, i.e., 1%  molybdenum  was  sufficient  o prevent  stable  pit growth at potentials  below  the transpassive region.  Thus, even 1M  NaC1  is  not  a severe  enough test medium  to differentiate  the behavior  of  the  1,  3,  and 5%  molybdenum alloys.

The behavior  of  the  high-purity alloys in 1M  NaC1 was almost  identical to  that  in  0.1N HC1. The molybdenum-free  alloy  showed  a greater tendency  toward pitting at  potentials just  below the  onset  of  transpassivity (0.79v). The alloys containing 2.5  and  5%  molybdenum were  not  pitted on scanning to  0.8v. Thus,  the superior resistance of  the  high-purity alloys to  pitting corrosion is  even  more evident in  1M  NaC1  than  it  was in 0.1N HC1.

The appearance of  typical electrodes after exceeding the  pitting potential is  shown in  Fig. 8.

Exposure  tests in FeCl3--Simple  exposure tests were performed  in  0.33M FeC13 at  pH  2.  These  results may  be  expected to be comparable  with the  pitting potential measurements in 1N  NaC1  despite  the  pH difference, since  pH  changes between 1 and 7 have little effect in  NaC1  solutions(6). The redox potential of  this  solution, as measured at  a platinum  electrode, was 0.540v vs. SCE. As can be seen  from Table  V, a rather  sharp transition exists  between compositions that  undergo severe  pitting corrosion and those  that are highly  resistant. These results agree quite  well with the pitting potential data  obtained in 1M  NaC1, especially when  account is taken of the fact  that polarization effects would cause the potential at the local  anodes  of the  corroding specimens  to be  somewhat less  noble  than  that  measured on  the  platinum electrode. It must  be  remembered  that the pitting potential measurements  were made on electrodes containing only  the  surface parallel to  the  rolling plane.

Fig. 7. Pitting potentials obtained  from potentiodynamic polarization scans  in  argon-saturated 1.0M  sodium chloride.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8. Pits on  representative electrodes after scanning  beyond the pitting  potential in argon-saturated 1M sodium chloride  at 24~ X100. (a)  (top)  17.6% Cr-13.5% Ni-2.93% Mo stainless steel; (b) (bottom)  20% Cr-39% Ni  stainless  steel.

<!-- image -->

It is well-known that  edges in stainless steels, i.e., planes  perpendicular to the rolling plane,  are often more  susceptible to pitting than is  the rolling plane (2).  Thus,  the  coupons  that  yielded only  edge pitting in the exposure  tests should  be considered to correspond to  no pitting up to  a potential of  about  0.5v  in the  controlled potential measurements.

## Discussion

These results show  that  the potentiodynamic scanning  technique can give  useful  information about  the relative pitting resistances of  stainless steels. However, it  is  also  clear  that  the  details of experimental procedure must  be  carefully controlled. In particular, scanning  rate  was  found to have a considerable influence on the  results obtained. The  avoidance of  crevice  corrosion was also  found to  be essential for  obtaining any  information on pitting potentials.

Table V. Results of  exposure  of  austenitic  steels to 0.33M ferric  chloride at pH  2  for  3  days

|            |                 |                          | Weight toss in 3 days,        |                                                                                                                              |
|------------|-----------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Nominal Cr | composition, Ni | % Mo                     | rag/din e                     | Remarks                                                                                                                      |
| 17.6       | 13.5            | 1,99 2.45 2.93 3.37 3.89 | 703 828 173 77 3 663 176 40 8 | General pitting General pitting Edge pitting One edge pit No visible attack Generalpitting Small edge pits No visible attack |
| 20         | 39              | 0.025 0.97 3.03 4.85     |                               | Pitsatsuspension                                                                                                             |

The results of  the  effects of  different scanning rates are  at  variance with  results reported in  the  literature for  molybdenum-free  stainless steel (4,6). It  has  been reported  that  faster  scans give more  noble pitting potentials, but the opposite  was  found  in this  work on  molybdenum-containing alloys.  The  observation made  in  the  present  studies  can be rationalized by assuming  that  the  passive film  thickens  with time,  at a potential in  the  passive range.  Thus the  passive film would be thicker the  slower  the speed  of  scanning. As the film  thickness increases, a larger  fraction of the potential difference between metal and solution would be expected  to occur  within the  film  and thus  not  be available at  the  film-solution interface to  assist in the entry  of  chloride ions  into the  film.

It  has  been  found  previously that  for  some stainless steel the passive  film  increases in stability, probably as a result of  increasing thickness, as  time  at  a given potential in  the  passive range  increases (8).  The effect was  observed  to be somewhat  more  pronounced  for alloys with  molybdenum than for those without molybdenum,  perhaps indicating that passive  film thickening is  more  important  when  molybdenum  is present in  the  alloys. A similar effect was reported by Streicher  (9),  who  found that passivation of type 316  after  pickling and before  undergoing  a  pitting test  had a  much  larger  beneficial effect than did a similar treatment of  type  304.  This  reasoning is  highly speculative, but  may, at  least in  part, account  for  the contradiction between results  from  this  work  and those  reported by others.

Even if  absolute  values of  the  pitting potential are open to question, it  appears  that  relative pitting potentials provide  useful information. In the  two series of austenitic alloys  investigated, increasing molybdenum  content  consistently increased the pitting potential except in the 13.5%  nickel  alloy  of highest molybdenum content. Here  the occurrence of  ferrite as a  second phase is  promoted by higher  molybdenum content  and complicates the situation by introducing differences in composition, that  is,  the  delta  ferrite would be enriched in  chromium and molybdenum and depleted in  nickel  (10). In  all other  steels, the  beneficial  effect of increasing molybdenum  content  on the pitting potential was clearly revealed  even when the increments were as  small  as  Y2  %. That  these  variations in pitting potential are significant  was confirmed  by the good  correlation obtained  with the results of exposure  tests in FeCI~. Of course, since  pitting potentials are dependent  on  test  conditions and prior history  of the specimen,  agreement  between pitting potentials and exposure results would  only be expected  when  specimen  treatment and exposure  conditions were very  similar in  the  two  tests. Otherwise, only  a  relative correlation would be  anticipated.

Pitting potential measurements  clearly indicate the imlSortance of minor constituents in  these  alloys. The high-purity alloys were much more resistant to  pitting than were the alloys  containing the usual  levels  of residual elements. The carbon  and nitrogen contents are probably  the most significant in  this  connection. Formation of chromium  and  molybdenum  carbides and nitrides would  deplete  the matrix  immediately surrounding the  precipitates of  chromium and molybdenum. Any depleted area  would be more susceptible to pitting because  of differences in composition; the discontinuities associated with an exposed particle of precipitate may also  create favorable sites for initiation of  pits. The work of  Streicher (9)  suggests that  carbon is more  effective than nitrogen  in  this regard.  He found that  large  nitrogen  additions reduced pitting. However, in  some cases  this  was  because the  nitrogen addition produced a wholly  austenitic steel and in  no case did he  study a  steel  with nitrogen as low  as the  high-purity steels considered in  this work.

On the  other  hand,  the  high-purity alloys had about the  same  critical current densities for  passivity as  the impure  steels of  similar molybdenum content. It  would be expected  that  small  areas  depleted  in chromium

or  molybdenum would make only  a small  contribution to the  over-all current required to produce  passivity.

The results of  the  critical current density and primary passivation potential determinations in  0.1N HC1 agreed well  with  previous measurements  in sulfuric acid  on similar alloys, i.e., molybdenum decreases the critical current density required to produce  passivity and to a lesser extent  shifts the  primary  passivation potential to more  active  potentials (8).  Nickel  had little  ffect on critical current  density, but did Shift the  primary  passivation potential in  the  noble  direction. Thus, molybdenum facilitates the attainment of the passive  state  for  these alloys  in 0.1N  HC1,  but nickel does  not.  These effects, however,  are  less  significant than  are  the changes  in  pitting potential with alloy  content as far  as over-all corrosion behavior  is concerned.

It  should  be  kept  in  mind that even  the  most highly alloyed steels tested were not  immune to  crevice corrosion  in  chloride media even though  their resistance to pitting was  very high. Thus, crevice  corrosion, although related to  pitting, appears  to  be  more difficult to avoid  by  means of alloy  additions than  is  pitting.

## Conclusions

Potentiodynamic  scanning in chloride  electrolytes yields  pitting potentials that  vary consistently with alloy  composition  and that  correlate well with exposure  tests in  FeC18 solution.

Resistance  to  pitting  increases  with  increasing molybdenum content  in 17.6%  Cr--13.5% Ni  or  20%

Cr--39%  Ni  austenitic stainless steels. Changes  in molybdenum content as  small as   89 %  have  a  significant effect on pitting potentials.

The  pitting resistance of austenitic stainless  teels increases when  the  nickel content is  raised from 13.5 to  39%.

High-purity austenitic alloys are  more  resistant o pitting than  are  steels containing appreciable amounts of  carbon  and nitrogen.

Manuscript  submitted  April 15,  1968;  revised manuscript  received ca. July 16, 1968.  This paper was presented at  the  Chicago Meeting,  Oct.  15-19,  1967, as Paper  59.

Any discussion of  this paper  will appear  in  a Discussion Section to  be  published in the June  1969  JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  J.  M  Kolotyrkin, Corrosion, 19, 261t  (1963).
2.  W. Schwenk, ibid., 20,  129t (1964).
3.  W. Schwenk, Corrosion  Sci., 5, 245  (1965).
4.  G.  Herbsleb, Werkstoffe  und  Korrosion, 16, 929 (1965)  ;  17,649  (1966).
5.  V. Hospadaruk and J.  V. Petrocelli, This  Journal, 113, 878  (1966).
6.  H.  P.  Leckie  and  H.  H.  Uhlig, ibid, 113,  1262  (1966).
7.  S. P. Odar  and H.  A.  Smith, Discussion, Trans. AIME, 135, 526  (1939).
8.  E.  A. Lizlovs, Corrosion, 22,  297t  (1966).
9.  M. A. Streicher, This  Journal, 1{}3, 375 (1956).
10.  H. T.  Shirley, J. Iron  Steel Inst., 174, 242  (1953).

## Polarographic and  Coulometric Studies of Compounds Related to 1,8-Dinitronaphthalene

George NI. LoPresti,  1 Suei-rong Huang,  and Anthony  A. Reidlinger*

Chemistry  Department, Long Island University, The Brooklyn  Center, Zeckendorf  Campus, Brooklyn, New  York

## ABSTRACT

The  polarographic reductions  of  1,8-dinitronaphthalene, 5,6-dinitroacenaphthene, 3,4-dinitroacenaphthenequinone, and  4,5-dinitronaphthalic anhydride, were studied in  buffered  solutions at  four  different pH  values. The relative wave heights of  the  multiple waves could  be interpreted reasonably in  terms  of  certain electron changes.  A  semi-empirical equation was derived to confirm  certain electron changes in the polarographic reductions. These electron changes were also  checked by coulometric measurements on electrolyses run at  controlled potentials.  Results indicated that  in  all but  one instance  there  was  agreement  between the values  for the electron changes obtained in the parallel analyses. The one exception  was 3,4-dinitroacenaphthenequinone.

In general, the polarographic reduction of a polynitro aromatic  compound proceeds  in  a stepwise manner,  and the  first step  corresponds to a four-electron change.  This  has  been  interpreted as  corresponding to the reduction of one of the nitro  groups to an hydroxylamino  group.  In a study  of the  polarographic reductions of  the  ten  dinitronaphthalenes (1), the  1,8isomer  was  the only compound  that  did not exhibit this  characteristic behavior. Instead it  gave an initial wave that  corresponded to  either an eight or  ten-electron  change depending  on  the  acidity of  the  solution. It  was suggested that  this might  be due to  the  formation  of the ring  compound  1,8-naphthopyrazole.

*  Electrochemical Society  Active  Member.

1Present  Address:  Atlantic  Richfield Oil Company,  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania  19100.

<!-- image -->

Thus far large-scale electrolyses of 1,8-dinitronaphthalene  at controlled potentials have not yielded  a product  identifiable as perinaphthopyrazole, but have instead yielded very  high-melting, highly colored materials which appear  to  be  polymeric.

Grimshaw and Rea  (2) have recently reported that the electroreduction of 1-acetylnaphthalene did not yield  the expected  pinacol  in base,  but gave an unexpected  product  due to coupling in  the  4-position.

In the present  investigation several  4,5-disubstituted  1,8-dinitronaphthalenes were prepared, and  their