<!-- image -->

Corrosion Science, Vol.  36,  No. 11, pp.  1825-1834, 1994 Copyright (~  1994  Elsevier Science Lid Printed in  Great  Britain. All  rights reserved 0010-938X/94  $7.(~) + 0.00

## 0010-938X(94)00095-.6

## THE ROLE OF  NITROGEN IN  THE PASSIVITY OF AUSTENITIC STAINLESS STEELS

A. SADOUGH VANINI*t", J.-P.  AUDOUARD$ and P. MARCUS*

*Laboratoire de  Physico-Chimie des  Surfaces, CNRS  (URA 425), Ecole  Nationale Superieure de Chimie  de  Paris, Universit6 Paris VI,  11  rue  Pierre et  Marie Curie, 75005  Paris, France :]:IRSID-Unieux, BP 50, 42702  Firminy Cedex,  France

Abstract--Three austenitic stainless steels (a  Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N alloy, an  ultra pure  Fe-18Cr-10Ni alloy and  a  type 304  stainless teel) were  used  in this study in order to investigate he effect of nitrogen on the electrochemical behaviour and  on  the  nature of  the passive film formed  on  the steels in acidic solution (0.5 M  H2SO4). The  presence of  nitrogen in the  alloy does  not apparently have  a  significant influence on the response of  the material to  anodic polarization i the acid electrolyte. Surface analysis of the alloys by XPS  after passivation shows  that  nitrogen is  enriched at  the  surface by anodic  segregation during dissolution and  passivation of  the  nitrogen-bearing alloys. After passivation of  the  alloys three chemical states of  nitrogen are  detected in  the  N ls spectrum. The peak  at low  binding energy  (397.7 \_+   0.1  eV) corresponds to  nitrogen bonded  essentially to  chromium  under the form  of a  nitride which  is incorporated in  the  passive film. The N ls peaks  observed at higher binding energies (400.2 \_+ 0.1  and  402  \_ +   0.1  cV) correspond to  nitrogen species located on  the  surface of  the  passivated alloys, which  arc  produced  by reaction of  the  alloy surface with the  solution.

## INTRODUCTION

In  the  presence of  both  nitrogen and molybdenum,  significant improvements  in  the resistance of  stainless steels  to  general and  localized corrosion  have  been reported. 1-5  H o w e v e r ,  it  remains  unclear if  n i t r o g e n alone  (i,e. in  the  absence  of molybdenum) is  capable of  improving the  corrosion resistance. It has  been  shown in a  recent study that nitrogen implanted into a  type  304  stainless steel does  not  improve the  dissolution and  passivation behaviour in  acid  solution.6 Nitrogen can  be  added  to stainless steels in  order  to  stabilize the  austenite phase and thus  it is  i m p o r t a n t to elucidate the  role of  this element  in  the  passivity of  the  alloy. The aim of  this work was to investigate, by electrochemical and surface  analytical measurements,  the effect of nitrogen on the dissolution and passivation of austenitic stainless  teel without  molybdenum. In order to clearly identify the effect  of nitrogen, two synthetic alloys were studied, one without  and  the  other with  nitrogen. A type  304 stainless steel was also  studied for  comparison.

## EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

The Fe-17Cr-13Ni4).15N  alloy used  in  this work  was provided by IRSID Unieux (France). As reference materials we used  an  ultra pure  Fe-I 8Cr-10Ni  alloy with less than 10  ppm of nitrogen in the bulk

tPermanent address: Mechanical  Engineering Department,  Amirkabir  University of  Technology, Hafez  Avenue  No.  424, Tehran, Iran.

Manuscript received 12  June  1994.

Table  l.  Elemental composition of  the  alloys (wt%)

|                           |    Fe |    Cr |    Ni | N       | Mo   | Mn   | Si   | Cu   | B,C,AI,P,S   |
|---------------------------|-------|-------|-------|---------|------|------|------|------|--------------|
| Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N        | 69.8  | 17    | 13    | 0.157   | .    | .    | .    |      |              |
| Fe-18Cr-10Ni (ultra pure) | 72    | 18    | 10    | <10 ppm | .    | .    | .    | .    |              |
| Type 304 stainless steel  | 72.01 | 17.38 |  8.28 | 0.04    | 0.14 | 1.43 | 0.49 | 0.15 | <0.1         |

prepared at  Ecole  des  Mines  de  St  Etienne (France) and  a  type 304  stainless steel supplied by  UGINE (France). The  chemical analysis of  the alloys is reported in Table  l. The  alloys were  mechanically polished with  0.5 ktm  diamond  paste, giving them  a  mirror-like finish.

The electrochemical experiments were  carried out  in  an  inert gas  glove box  by  using a  0.5  M  H2SO4 solution which  was  de-aerated by  purging with  N  2.  Sample  disks of  10  mm  diameter were  mounted  in  the electrochemical g ass cell equipped with  a  platinum counter electrode and  a  mercurous sulfate reference electrode. The electrode potentials reported in  this work are  referenced to  the  standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).  Following insertion of  the samples into the  electrochemical cell, they were  cathodically reduced  (1  V,  300  s)  prior to  measurement  of  the  anodic polarization curve. Polarization curves were recorded using a  voltage sweep  rate of  1  mV  s -1  while sample  passivation prior to  surface analysis was carried out  by  a  potential step to  650  or  1050  mV(SHE)  for different times of  passivation (1,  15,  30  and 120min).  The  passivated electrodes were removed from solution under applied  potential, rinsed immediately in  ultra-pure water, dried in  nitrogen gas  and  then  transferred to  the  surface analysis ystem using the transfer vessel and  the fast entry port located on  the preparation chamber  of the spectrometer. A survey XPS spectrum of  each  sample  was  immediately recorded to  determine its surface cleanliness. The presence of  a C  Is  signal reveals the  existence of  a contamination layer; the  only  metallic elements detected were  the  constituting elements of  the  alloys. High resolution XPS  spectra were  acquired for seven energy regions corresponding to  the core levels: Fe 2133/2, Cr  2133/2, Ni  2p3/2 , O lSl/2, N lsl/2, S  2P3/2,1/2 and  C lsl/e. The  data processing was  carried out  using curve-fitting procedures based  on  reference spectra obtained for the  clean and  oxidized stainless steels. XPS measurements were  obtained using an  AI  Ka Xray  source  (hv  = 1486.6  eV) and a hemispherical analyser, with  a pass  energy  of  20  eV for  the  high resolution spectra. The spectrometer (VG ESCALAB MK  II) was  calibrated using the  Au 4f7/2 (binding energy (BE)  = 84.0  eV)  and  Cu 2p312  (BE = 932.7  eV)  peaks.

Composition depth profiles of  passive films on  the  stainless steels were  obtained by  ion  sputtering the surface, using a  VG  AG60  ion  gun  mounted  in  the  analysis chamber,  under  the  following conditions: an ion  beam voltage of  4  kV and  a  current density of  0.5/~A  cm-2.

## EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

## Electrochemical behaviour

Figure  1  shows  the  potentiodynamic (i-E) curves for  the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni--0.15N alloy, the  ultra-pure alloy (Fe-18Cr-10Ni) and  the 304  stainless steel in  0.5  M  H2804 solution.  The potential  scan  (lmVs  -a) was  carried  out  from  -350  to 1350  mV(SHE).  The salient electrochemical features are  reported in  Table  2.  The

Table  2.  Electrochemical data

| Alloys                   | Corrosion potential (mV(SHE))   |   Potential atthe peak maximum (mV(SHE)) |   Currentatthe peak maximum (pA cm -z) |   Currentinthe passive state ~A cm -2) |
|--------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N       | -159                            |                                      -40 |                                   1225 |                                    2   |
| Fe-18Cr-10Ni             | - 180                           |                                      -40 |                                    600 |                                    2.7 |
| Type 304 stainless steel | -130                            |                                      -70 |                                     18 |                                    1.8 |

Fig.  1.  Potentiodynamic curves for the  three alloys in  t).5 M H2SO4  (1  mV  s-L).

<!-- image -->

current at the peak  maximum varies  in the following  order:alloy  with 0.15% N  &gt;  alloy without  N  ~&gt;  304 stainless  teel. The major difference is  mainly  associated with the  presence  of  a small  amount  of  molybdenum (0.14%) in  the  304 stainless steel. The residual currents  in  the  passive state  are  similar for  the  three  alloys.

For the  XPS  analysis of  passive  films, the  passivation was carried  out  by stepping the  potential  from the  corrosion potential  to  the  passivation  potential  of 650 mV(SHE). The recorded current  versus  time  plots are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  Inspec-

<!-- image -->

time

(s)

Fig. 2. Potentiostatic curves  for  the  three  alloys in 0.5 M H2SO 4 (at 650 mV(SHE)).

Fig.  3.  Potentiodynamic  urves for 304L and  304LN stainless steels in  1  M  H2SO4  at 60°C (0.25 mV  s-l).

<!-- image -->

tion  of the  curves  reveals that  the  three  alloys exhibit similar behaviours in potentiostatic experiments.

If  the  results of  the  potentiodynamic and potentiostatic experiments are  compared  for the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni--0.15N and  the  ultra-pure alloy, nitrogen added  to  the alloy does  not  apparently influence markedly  on the  response of  the  material to anodic polarization. Additional experiments have  been  carried out  to  compare  the general corrosion behaviour of  304L and  304LN  stainless steels (containing 0.068 and  0.145% N,  respectively) in  1  M  H2SO 4  at 60°C.  The  results are  presented in  Fig. 3.  They  show that the  addition of  N to  the  304L stainless steel is detrimental in  the active state. No significant effect is observed in  the  passive state.

## Analysis of  the passive films

The spectra recorded  after argon  ion  sputter cleaning of  the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni0.15N alloy and  after passivation of  the  three alloys at  650  mV(SHE)  are  shown in Fig. 4  for the  take-off angle of  90 °  (angle of  the  sample  surface with  the  direction in which  the  electrons are  analysed). The detection of  XPS signals emitted by  the  alloy elements (Fe,Cr,Ni) indicates that the  passive film is very  thin. The curve  fitting of the  spectra in  Fig. 4  was  performed in  the  way described previously, using reference spectra recorded with  reference materials. 7

The Fe 2p3/2 signal has  been  resolved into Fe  2+ and  Fe 3+.  The Cr 2p3/2  region indicates a  marked enrichment of  Cr 3÷ in  the  passive film  for the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni0.15N alloy as  well as  for the  ultra pure  and  the 304  alloys. The  chromium  signal was resolved into  chromium  oxide  Cr3+ox  (Cr20 3 type)  and chromium hydroxide Cr3+hy  (Cr(OH)3  type).7 Nickel oxide is not  detected in  the passive films of  the three alloys, in  agreement with  other reported results. 7"8

The oxygen (O is) region clearly shows the  presence of  the  oxide  (0 2-)  and hydroxide (OH-) states. A third peak  is  present corresponding to  oxygen  in  H20 and  SO  ]-  ions. These  results are  in  agreement with  XPS  analysis of  the  passive film on austenitic stainless steels reported by  others. 8  It is observed  here  that the  0  2signal is lower  on  the  alloy with  nitrogen than  on  the  Fe-18Cr-10Ni  alloy.

Fig.  4. XPS  spectra recorded at  a  take-off angle  of  90 °  (the curve  fitting of  the N  I s  spectra is  reported in  Fig.  5).

<!-- image -->

For the clean,  unpassivated Fe-17Cr-13Ni~).15N alloy  the  N  ls  spectrum, recorded  after  10min  of ion etching, shows a N  ls  signal  at  397.6eV. After passivation the  nitrogen XPS  signal is  considerably more intense. This  result shows that nitrogen is  enriched at  the  surface and  incorporated in  the  passive film and  the previous  observation of the  lower  O 2- signal is  an indication that  the  nitrogen enrichment in  the  film takes place at  the expense  of the  oxide  content. In  the Cr  2p3/2 spectrum  of  the  nitrogen-containing alloy a  broad  intense peak  at low  binding energy is  believed to  be associatd with  chromium in  the  underlying alloy and chromium located in  the  film and  bonded  to  nitrogen. 6  The  intensity of  this peak  is lower  for the ultra pure  and  the  304  alloys, which  indicates that chromium nitride is formed  on  the alloy containing nitrogen.

In  an  attempt to  obtain a  clearer picture of  the  chemical states of  nitrogen in  the passive film, the  N ls  spectra were  fitted by  three peaks. The curve-fitted spectra are shown in  Fig. 5.  On the  basis of  previously reported results 6  the  peak  located at  low binding energy  (N(1)  at  397.7  + 0.1  eV) is  assigned to  nitride incorporated in  the passive film. A significant N(1)  peak  is detected only  on  the  alloys with  bulk  nitrogen

Fi~. 5.  Curve  fitting of  the  N Is  spectra of: (a) the  304-type alloy, (b)  the  Fe-18Cr-10Ni (ultra-pure) alloy and  (c) the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N alloy. (cps) counts per  second;  (0) takeoff angle  of  the  electrons.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  6.  XPS sputter depth  profilc for the  passive film formed  at 650  mV(SHE)  (30  rain) on the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni4).15N  alloy.

<!-- image -->

(i.e. the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N and  the  304  stainless steel which  contains 0.04% of nitrogen). The intensity of  N(1)  is higher for the  alloy with  higher N content. This observation confirms that N(1)  originates from  bulk  nitrogen. The peak  located at  a higher binding energy  (N(2)  at 400.2  +\_   0.1  eV) may originate from  N-H or  N-O.°'9 The third peak  located at  an  even  higher binding energy  (N(3)  at  402  + 0.1  eV), originates from  nitrogen which  may be  under  the form  of NH~. 9  Similar N 1 s  binding energy  (399.9  and  402.5  eV) have  been  reported for  the  molecular adsorption of inhibitors (-NR3 and -N+R4) on gold  surfaces 1°  and  for N2H 4  on  Fe(111). 11   The results for  the  N ls  XPS  spectra at  different depths  in  the  passive film on the  alloy show  that the intensities of  the high  binding energy species decrease rapidly upon  ion sputtering (Fig. 6). This  confirms the location of  these species to  be  at the passive film surface and  supports the  view  that they  are  produced  by  reaction with  electrolyte. The  peaks  N(2)  and  N(3)  were  detected on  the three alloys after passivation (Fig. 5). The fact that they are  detected even  on  the  ultra-pure alloy with  a  nominal  nitrogen content less than  10  ppm  indicates that these species may come not  only  from  the bulk  nitrogen but  also from  nitrogen-containing species present at  trace level in  the solution.

Complementary  experiments have  revealed that N(2)  and  N(3)  are  also observed when the  nitrogen atmosphere in  the glove  box  is  replaced by  argon, showing  that these species do  not  come from  reaction with  gaseous nitrogen or  nitrogen dissolved in  the  electrolyte.

For  comparison between  wet  and  dry  oxidation an  oxide layer was  formed  on  the 304 stainless steel in  pure  oxygen  at  500°C (pO2 = 10 5  mbar)  in  the  preparation chamber  of the  XPS spectrometer. The  spectrum (Fig. 5a)  shows  that the intensity of

the  N(3)  peak  on  the oxide  layer is much lower  than  the  intensity observed after the passivation experiments which supports the  view that  this  species is  formed by reaction with  the aqueous  solution. It is noted  that two  new  peaks  were  detected after dry  oxidation: one  at 399.2  eV IN(2')] which  may correspond to  nitrogen bonded  to H 9'12'13 and  the  other at  404  eV [N(4)] which  may correspond to  nitrogen bonded  to oxygen. 9  The chemical state of  nitrogen segregated on the  alloy surface during high temperature annealing in  U H V   was  also investigated on  the 304  alloy. After cleaning the  surface by argon  ion  sputtering, the  alloy was heated  for  60  min in  ultra-high vacuum in  the  preparation chamber of  the  XPS  system  at  T = 500°C. The N  ls spectrum  is  shown in  Fig.  5a.  An  intense N  ls  signal at  the  position of  N(1) is observed. It corresponds clearly to  N-metal  bonds  formed  by  surface segregation of bulk  nitrogen.

To aid  in  locating the  different nitrogen species in  the  passive film, composition depth  profiles were recorded by ion  sputtering and XPS  analysis. The results are shown in  Fig. 6  for the  N-bearing alloy. The XPS signal emitted by  0  2-  in  the  passive film is shown as  an  indicator of  the depth  scale during argon  sputtering. For  the  three alloys, the  OH-/O 2-  intensity ratio decreases with  sputtering time, confirming that the  hydroxide layer constitutes the  outer part of  the  film. The slow  decrease of  the intensity of  the  N(1)  peak  at  low  binding energy  (397.7 eV),  corresponding to  Nmetal  bonds,  indicates that the  nitride is present in  the  inner part of  the  passive film near  the  passive film/alloy interface. The results for N(2)  and  N(3)  at  different depths in  the  passive film show the  high  binding energy  nitrogen species to  be  mainly at  the passive film  surface, confirming that they  are  produced  at  least in  part via  reaction with  the  electrolyte.

Angle-dependent XPS measurements  of the  N ls region were  carried out  in  order to  obtain additional information on  the  location of  N(1), N(2)  and  N(3)  in the  passive film.  The spectra for  two take-off angles, 90  °  and 50 °,  are  shown in  Fig. 5c.  The results  how that the  N(2)  component  is present on  the  passive film  surface whereas N(1)  is in  the  inner oxide part of  the film. The results for N(3)  are ambiguous  as  N(3) was found  to  be  somewhat unstable during  long  exposure to  the  X-ray  beam.

In  order  to  investigate the  effect of  time  of  polarization and potential on the segregation of  nitrogen in  the  passive film, passivation experiments were  carried out for the  Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N alloy at  two  different potentials, 650  and 1050  mV(SHE),  for  1,  15,  30  and 120  min.  The N  ls  XPS  spectrum  recorded after 30  min at  650  mV(SHE) and at  1050  mV(SHE)  are  shown in  Fig. 5c.  The recorded intensities ofOH-, O 2-, N(1), N(2)  and  N(3)  versus time  of  polarization are  plotted in  Fig.  7.  Inspection of  the  curves  reveals that  the  intensity of  the  N(1) signal decreases with  the  time  of  polarization for  the  first -15-30  min and  then  becomes constant. The 0 2-  signal first increases and becomes  constant after -15-30  min of passivation. These results are  consistent with  the  view  that N(1) is  associated to nitride forming  at the  alloy/passive film interface during passive film growth  and  that the  growth  of the  passive film covering the  nitride causes the  attenuation of  the  signal emitted by  N(1)  at the  interface. The N(1)  signal becomes  constant when the  passive film  has  reached a  stationary thickness.

The larger scatter in  the  data  recorded for  N(2)  and  to  a  larger extent for  N(3), which likely results from contamination of  the  solution by nitrogen containing species, makes it  difficult to  analyse the  observed  variation of  these  signals with potential and  time.

cps

<!-- image -->

ev(

\_ cpsxov

Fig.  7. The recorded  intensities of O  2-  ,  OH-, N(1),  N(2) and N(3) signals versus  time  of polarization for  the Fe-17Cr-13Ni-0.15N alloy.

## CONCLUSIONS

The electrochemical behaviour  and the  surface  composition  of Fe-17Cr-13Ni0.15N stainless steel have been investigated with special emphasis on the role  of nitrogen. The addition of  nitrogen does  not  improve  the  general  corrosion behaviour of  the  alloy.

After  passivation of  the  alloy, three  chemical  states of  nitrogen are  detected: the high  and intermediate binding  energy  peaks  are  assigned to  nitrogen species located at  the  surface of  the  passive film and are  produced at  least in  part  via  reaction with  the electrolyte. The peak at  low  binding  energy  corresponds  to  N-metal (essentially Cr) bonds under the  form of  nitride, present  in  the  inner part  of  the  passive film  near  the passive film/alloy interface. This  nitride phase  is formed by anodic  segregation of  the nitrogen  contained  in  the  alloy, during  the  dissolution stage  preceding  passivation.

## REFERENCES

1. Y. C. Lu,  R. Bandy,  C. R. Clayton and R. C. Newman, J.  electrochern. Soc. 130,  1774  (1983).
2. J.  E.  Truman,  M. J. Coleman  and K. R. Pirt, Br.  Corros. J. 12,236  (1977).
3. R. Bandy  and D. Van  Rooyen, Corrosion 39,227  (1983).
4. J.  J. Eckenrod and C. W. Kovack,  ASTM STP 679,  p.  17.  Philadelphia, PA  (1977).

5. K.  Osozawa and  N.  Okato, Passivity and  its Breakdown on  Iron and  Iron Based  Alloys, p.  135.  NACE (USA-Japan  Seminar, Honolulu), Houston,  TX (1976).
6. P.  Marcus  and  M. E.  Bussell, Appl.  Surf. Sci. 59,  7  (1992).
7. E.  De Vito  and  P.  Marcus, Surf. Interface Anal. 19,403  (1992).
8. B.  Brox  and  I. Olefjord, Proc.  Stainless Steel 84, G6teborg, Sweden,  p.  134.  The Institute of  Metals, London (1985).
9. C.  R.  Clayton, L.  Rosenzweig, M. Oversluizen and  Y.  C.  Lu,  in Surfaces, Inhibition and  Passivation (eds E.  McCafferty and  R.  J.  Brodd), p.  323.  The  Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ (1986).
10. A.  Swift, A. J. Paul  and  J. C.  Vickerman, Surf. Interface Anal. 20,  27  (1993).
11.  M. Grunze, Surf. Sci. 81,603  (1979).
12. R.  D.  Willenbruch, C.  R.  Clayton, M. Oversluizen, D. Kim and  Y.  Lu, Corros.  Sci. 31,  17  (1990).
13. C.  R.  Clayton and K. G. Martin, Proc.  Conf.  on  High Nitrogen  Steels (eds J.  Foct  and  A.  Hendry), p.  256.  The Institute of  Metals, London (1989).