<!-- image -->

Corrosion .Science, Vol. 38,  No. 7,  pp. 1203-1220, 1996 Copyright 0  1996  Elsevier Science Ltd Printed in  Great  Britain. All  rights reserved 001&amp;938X/96 $15.00+0.00

## PII:  S001&amp;938X(96)00018-2

## THE INFLUENCE OF  NITROGEN ON THE PASSIVATION OF STAINLESS STEELS

## I.  OLEFJORD and  L. WEGRELIUS

Department of  Engineering  Metals,  Chalmers University of  Technology,  S-412  96  GGteborg,  Sweden

Abstract-Two austenitic stainless steels, Fe-20Cr-20Ni-6Mo-O.011N and  Fe-20Cr-20Ni-6Mo-O.2N were polarized in  0.1  M  HCl+  0.4 M  NaCl  at  22  and 65°C.  Pitting is  initiated on both steels. The high  N-containing steel is  repassivated while  the  pits are  growing on the  low N-containing  steel at  65°C.  The composition  and the thickness of  the  passive films (determined  by ESCA)  formed during  polarization to  the  potentials - 75,  +  500  and + 800  mV  (SCE) are  independent  of  the  N content  of  the  steels. Nitrogen  segregates anodically to  the  metal-oxide interface during  passivation. A model for  a  synergistic effect between MO  and N is suggested. Copyright  0  1996 Elsevier Science  Ltd.

Keywords: A. stainless steel, C.  passive films, C.  pitting corrosion.

## INTRODUCTION

Nitrogen added to  austenitic stainless  teels improves their pitting and crevice  corrosion resistance.'' Several  mechanisms  for the  role  of nitrogen  in  stainless steels have been suggested. Janik-Czachor et  aL3 proposed that N forms  carbonitrides of  the  type  Me2(C, N) and as  a  consequence the  number  of  high  chromium containing  carbide  particles becomes lower  and thereby  the  sensitivity to  pitting corrosion  is reduced  since pitting is often  initiated at  the  boundaries  of  carbide  inclusions. Osozawa  and Okato4 found that  NH: ions  appear in  the  aqueous  solution  after  pitting tests of N-containing stainless  teels. Jargelius and Wallin  have shown  that  the  amount  of NH: ions  in  the  electrolyte corresponds to  the amount  of  N in  the  dissolved volume of  the  metal. Thus,  NH: ions  are  formed by reaction between N and protons  when  the  passive film  is locally broken and the  metal  is dissolved. The reaction prevents  lowering  of  the pH  in  the  pits and may  thereby  enhance repassivation.

It  has  also  been proposed that  a  beneficial effect of  N  is obtained  by a  synergistic effect with  Mo.'*~~ Nitrogen bearing  stainless teels, without  MO, do not  show any influence of the  N content  on the  polarization behaviour of  the  steels: Janik-Czachor et  aL3 found that the  critical current  density at  passivation and the  passivation potential of  a  series of  MO-free austenitic stainless  teels (18Cr-5Ni-1OMn) containing  0.07435  wt% N  are  independent of  the  N content; Sadough  Vanini et  al. 'Jo found that  N present in  austenitic steels without MO  has  no influence on the  anodic  polarization behaviour.  Surface  analysis performed by Clayton and Martin'* has shown  that  passive  films  formed  on high N-containing steels contain  higher  concentrations of  Cr  and MO  than  comparable steels containing less N.  They also suggest  that  during anodic polarization  of high N-containing stainless steels, N segregates to  the  oxide-metal  interface where it forms a  relatively stable interstitial nitride phase  enriched  in  Cr,  MO  and Ni.7*13-'6 This  phase  is proposed to  act  as  a  kinetic barrier to

dissolution of  the  alloy. It has  also been  reported'  that N does  not  have  an influence on the anodic dissolution and  passivation  of highly  alloyed  stainless steels. The  polarization behaviour  of  the  steels exposed to  hydrochloric acid  is not  influenced by the  N content  in  the steel. It  was also shown  that  the  composition and the  thickness of  the  passive films formed during  polarization for  short times  are  independent  of  the  N content. It was concluded  that N  does not influence the  primary passivation behaviour of  the  steel. Instead  it was stated that  N  may  enhance repassivation of  initiated pits. It  is obvious that  the  behaviour of  the steels cannot be  generalized from these conflicting results.

The  aim  of this  paper is  to study the influence of N  on  initiation of pitting and repassivation of  austenitic stainless teels polarized  in  hydrochloric  acid. Two  alloys with the  same composition,  except  for  their nitrogen  content, are  analysed. The composition of the  reaction products is  analysed  by means  of ESCA.  A  model  for  the  synergistic effect between MO  and N is suggested.

## EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

The compositions  of  the  stainless steels are  given  in  Table 1. The steels were heat  treated at  1100  and 1250°C followed  by quenching in  water  in  order  to  homogenize  the  structure. The samples,  4  = 11  mm.  were polarized in  de-aerated 0.1  M  HCl +  0.4 M  NaCl  at  22  and 65°C.  The electrolyte was prepared  from pro  analysis grade  chemicals  and de-ionized water. Table 2 shows the  N  contents  species present  in  the  water used for  preparation  of the electrolyte.

The samples  were  pre-treated by  polishing on emery paper  and finally on 1  pm diamond paste.  Polarization  was  performed  in an electrochemical  cell  attached to the ESCA instrument. The arrangement allows  the  samples  to  be  transferred to  the  analyser  without air  exposure.  The electrolyte was de-aerated  by Ar bubbling  for  2  h before  exposure.  The samples  were  activated at  - 700  mV  for  10  min.  The sweep  rate at  the  potentiodynamic tests was 1  mVs\_'.  The samples  prepared  for  the  ESCA analyses were polarized by stepping the potential from the  activation potential to  the  potentials - 75,  500  and 800  mV  (SCE).  The potentials were  maintained  for  10  min and 2  h.  Isopropanol  was pumped  through  the  cell in order  to  break  the  electrical circuit. The samples  were  rinsed with  methanol before  they  were introduced  into the  ESCA systems. The reference electrode was saturated calomel  electrode (SCE).  All  potentials in  this paper  refer to  the  SCE  scale.

The ESCA instrument  (PHI 5500)  was operated  by using  monochromized AlK, X-ray. High resolution spectra were recorded  with  23.5 eV pass  energy. The samples  were  analysed at  the  take-off angles  30', 45'  and 80'. The take-off angle  is defined as  the  angle  between the surface and the  spectrometer  entrance. The binding  energy, BE, scale of  the  instrument  was calibrated on Au and Cu: BE(Au  4f7,~) = 84.0  eV, BE(Cu 2~~~2) = 932.7  eV.

Table I. The  chemical  composition  of the  steels

| Sample                   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   |
|--------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
|                          | Fe                  | Cr                  | Ni                  | MO                  | N                   | C                   | Si                  | Mn                  | P                   | S                   | w                   |
| Fe-Cr-Ni-Mo Fe-Cr-Ni-M+N | Balance Balance     | 19.86 19.74         | 19.98 19.96         | 5.99                | 0.011 0.19          | 0.006 0.005         | 0.08 0.09           | 0.20 0.14           | 0.010 0.009         | 21 ppm 22ppm        | 0.03 0.03           |
|                          |                     |                     |                     | 5.96                |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |

Table  2.  The contents of  N species in  the  water

| NO;(mgl-')   |   NO; (mg I-') |   NH: (mg 1-l) |
|--------------|----------------|----------------|
| < 0.005      |           0.08 |           0.03 |

## EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Figure 1 shows  potentiodynamic  polarization curves  recorded from  the two  alloys exposed to  0.1  M  HCl + 0.4 M  NaCl  at  22°C.  The cathodic  branch below - 300  mV  (SCE) represents hydrogen  evolution. The  alloys  are  passivated at  about  -2OOmV (SCE). No visible difference between the  polarization behaviour of  the  two materials is observed.  The result implies  that  the kinetics of formation of the  passive  films  on the two alloys  are identical and hence  independent of  the  N content  of  the  alloys.

The effect of  N  on the  corrosion  properties of  the  steels is demonstrated in  Fig.  2.  The current  vs  time  is shown  for  the  two alloys, with  high  (0.19 wt%)  and low (0.01 wt%)  N contents, polarized to  500  mV  (SCE) in the  test solution at  the  temperatures 22  and 65°C.  At 22°C both the  high  and the  low N-containing  alloys are  passivated, Fig.  2(a)  and (b). The general behaviour  of  the  current  is the  same for  the  two alloys. However, the  diagram shows that  the  current  fluctuates markedly on the  low  N-containing  steel. It is obvious  that  pits are initiated and then  they  are  repassivated. Even on the  high  N-containing  steel low  magnitude fluctuations of  the  current  occur,  indicating pit initiation and repassivation.

Exposure of  the  high  N-containing  alloy at  65°C to  500  mV  (SCE),  Fig.  2(c), shows that the alloy  is  passivated. The  current  is  only slightly higher  than at  room  temperature. However, pronounced  variations of  the  current appear,  showing  more clearly that initiation and repassivation of  pits occur.  The  low N-containing  alloy, on the  other  hand, shows a tendency for  passivation within  the  first 10  s  of  polarization, but thereafter it  exhibits a steadily increasing current  due to  propagation  of  active pits.

Fig.  1.  Potentiodynamic  curves for  the  alloys exposed  to  de-aerated 0.1 M  HCI +  0.4  M NaCl at room temperature, sweep rate  1 .O mV  s-l.

<!-- image -->

1

<!-- image -->

120

Fig. 2. Current  vs  time for  the  alloys  polarized  to  500 mV (SCE)  in  0.1  M  HCI  + 0 (a)  22°C; (b)  22'C: (c)  65'C. .4  M  NaCl  at:

Figure  3 shows  SEM micrographs of the low  N-containing steel  surface.  The  samples had  been  polarized to 800 mV for  2  h.  The  white spots  on  Fig.  3(a)  image  pits. Figure 3(b) (10,000 x ) shows  that pits  are formed on  inclusion-free areas.  The  pits  on  the high  Ncontaining  alloy  are  too small to  be seen in SEM.

High  resolution ESCA spectra recorded from  the two  alloys  after  passivation at  room

Fig. 3. SEM  micrographs taken  from the  low N-containing  steel after polarization to  800  mV for2h.

<!-- image -->

temperature for 10  min at  500  mV (SCE) are  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The chemical  states of  the elements  are  obtained  by using  the  Shirley curve  fitting procedure.  The dotted  curves  show the  sum  of the  individual peaks.  Both the  oxide and the  metallic states of the  metallic elements  Ni,  Fe?  Cr and MO  are  detected. Nickel  is mainly  present in  its metallic state, only low intensity peaks  representing Ni hydroxide are  found.  The oxide  states of  iron  are  Fe'+ and Fe3+. Chromium is  present  in  its trivalent state; signals from Cr3+ bound  to  OH-, Cr3'(hy),  and 02--ions,  Cr3+(ox),  are  observable.

Both the  MO  3~3,~ and the  MO  3d electron levels were recorded.  The former overlaps with  N  1s. The curve  fitting of  the  MO 3d spectra  is based  on a  calibration study's  of  MO oxides. It  appears  that  MO  is present  in  tetraand hexavalent  states. The shapes  of  the  two MO 3d spectra  are  fairly similar  showing that  the  distribution  of  the  different  MO  species in the  films  of the  two alloys are  independent of the  N  content  of  the  steels. The  MO  3~3,~

Fig.  4.  High resolution ESCA spectra  recorded  from alloys after passivation for  10min  at 500  mV:  (a) 0.011 wt%  N content  steel; (b) 0.19 wt%  N content  steel.

<!-- image -->

spectra  are  curve fitted by using  the  intensity ratio  between the  MO  3psjz and the  MO 3d signals, experimentally  determined from  the N-free sample. The  shadowed  peaks at 397.7eV  in Fig.  4 represent  N  enriched at  the oxide/metal  interface. Its  identity and location  will  be discussed  later in  this paper.  The  N  signal intensity from  the  high Ncontaining alloy  is noticeable, while  the  signal from the  low  N-containing  steel is very  weak. Further, both steels display N  1s  peaks  at  399.1 and 400.3  eV;  their positions represent N in the  species NHs  and NH:,  respectively. t9**' The intensities of  these signals are  independent of  the  N content  in  the  steel and their origin will be  discussed below.

Quantitative  analysis  is  performed  in order to determine the composition and the thickness of the  oxide products and the  distribution of  the  nitrogen  species. The photoelectron yields, the  attenuation lengths, the  densities of  the  species and the  electron take-off angles  are  taken  into  consideration. Details about the  quantification procedure are  given elsewhere.2'P24

Figure  5  shows the  thickness of  the  passive film  vs  the  potential. The two alloys were polarized for  10  min at 22°C in  the  passive range  from - 75  to  800  mV  (SCE).  It appears  that N does  not  influence the  thickness of  the  initially formed passive film. The oxide  thickness increases linearly with the  potential. At - 75 and 800  mV, the  oxide  products  are 12  and 22  A, respectively. The growth of  the  oxide  products  is 13  A V-'

The in-depth  distribution of  the  elements  in  a  thin  film  can principally be determined from  angle dependent  ESCA measurements. The  procedure requires  that  the layer  is uniform in  thickness and covers  a  smooth  surface. The requirement  of  smoothness cannot be  completely  fulfilled during  the  preparation and polarization of  a  metal. The samples  were mechanically  polished, which does not give  a perfectly smooth  surface. Electropolishing gives  a smoother  surface, but it  causes  anodic segregation of the  alloying elements  and thereby  changing the  passivation properties. Even during  passivation the  surface becomes roughened due to  non-uniform anodic  dissolution. In  order  to  demonstrate  the  influence of the surface  preparation  condition  on the  angle-dependent  results, a test was performed where the  intensities of the  signals from the  oxide and the  metal phases  were recorded.

Fig.  5.  The thickness of  the  passive film vs  the  potential.

<!-- image -->

Figure  6  shows the  measured intensity ratio, Jox/lmet, recalculated to  Cr  equivalents2' vs  the angle  after passivations for  10  min at  500  mV  (SCE) of  an electropolished surface  (dashed line) and of  a  mechanically  polished  surfaceldotted line). The solid line shows the  calculated angle dependence  from  an  assumed  16A thick uniform  Cr203  layer located on  an atomically  flat Cr metal  surface. It  appears  that  neither the  electropolished surface nor the mechanically  polished  surface  gives the  theoretical angle  dependence,  but  the  difference is relatively small.

Fig.  7(a) and (b)  shows the  cation concentration  vs  the  take-off angle  for  the  two alloys after passivation at  500mV (SCE) for 10min. The concentrations  are  estimated  directly from the  measured intensities without  taking  into  consideration the  true  distribution of  the elements. It  appears  that  the  concentration  of  Cr3+(hy) decreases with  increasing take-off angle, whereas  the  concentrations of  the  elements  Cr3+(ox)  and Fe3+ increase with  the  takeoff  angle. The take-off angle  dependence shows that  at  this potential the  Cr3+(hy) ions  are present in  an  outer  layer, while  Cr3+(ox) and Fe3+ ions  are  situated in  an  inner  oxide  layer. It is not  possible to  notice  any clear angle  dependence for  the  ions  Fe2+,  Mo4+,  Mo6+ and Ni2+. These elements  may  be present  in  both the  oxide and the  hydroxide layers. The distribution and the  concentration  of  the  cations in  the  passive film  seem to  be  independent of  the  N content  of  the  steel. The solid lines, Cr3+(hy)TH, in  Fig.  7  show the  expected  angle dependence of  Cr3+(hy) from a  6.5  A thick layer of  Me(OH)3  (Me = cation) containing 75% Cr(OH),  located  on the  surface of  a  10  A thick layer  of  oxide  of  the  type  Me203. The angle dependence of  the  measured Cr3+(hy) intensities are, in  a  qualitative way,  in  agreement with the  expected  angle  dependence. The thickness of  the  hydroxide layer is  obtained  from the intensity ratio  I(OH-)/1(02-).  The  compositions of  the  oxide  and hydroxide layers  and their variation with  the  potential is extensively described  in  Ref.  25.

Angle-dependent ESCA measurements  of  the  N  ls/Mo  3p region  were carried  out in order  to  obtain  information  on the  location of  the  nitrogen  species. Figure  8  shows N  Is  and

-I

1

1

Fig.  6.  The measured intensity ratio P/I'' vs  the  take-off angle  after polarization for  10  min at  500  mV  (SCE) of  an  electropolished surface and of  a  mechanically polished surface.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7. The cation content in  the  passive  film  vs  the  take-off  angle;  The  solid  curves Cr'(hy)TH are  theoretical concentrations calculated  from  a  model  where  a  6.5  A thick  hydroxide  layer  covers a 10  A  thick  oxide.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  8.  The angle-dependent ESCA  measurements of  the  N  Is  and MO  3p3,* signals recorded from the  0.011 wt%  N and the  0.19 wt%  N containing alloys after passivation at  500  mV  (SCE) for  IO  min.

<!-- image -->

MO 3p  signals recorded  at  various  take-off angles  from the  two alloys after polarization at 500  mV  (SCE) for  10  min.  The shadowed  peaks  represent Mo6* and N signals. It  appears that  the  intensity ratio N/Mo6' increases with  the  take-off angle  showing that  nitrogen  is located close to  the  metal-oxide  interface.

An attempt  has  been  done to  quantify the  amount and  the  distribution of  nitrogen in  the surface region. The data  points in  Fig. 9  show the  intensity ratios, N/(0*-  +  OH-) vs  takeoff  angle  obtained after  polarization of the high N-containing  steel for IOmin  at the potentials -7.5,  500  and 800mV (SCE).  The measured ratios are  connected  with  dashed lines. The lower  solid lines in  the  figure show the  expected  intensity ratios from 0.2  wt%  N (bulk  composition)  uniformly  distributed in  the  metal  phase. It  appears  that the  measured N/(0*-  + OH-) ratios are  about  four  times higher  than  expected  from N in the  bulk  of  the metal. Thus,  it is obvious  that  N is enriched  at  the  oxide-metal  interface. The amount of  N at  the  interface is estimated  from the  measured N/oxygen  intensity ratio. It  is easily found that  the  N  content  at  the  interface is less than  a  monolayer.  The upper  solid lines in  Fig.  9 show the  estimated angle  dependent  intensity ratios from a  model where the  atomic  sites at

Fig.  9. The measured intensity  ratios.  100 x N/(0'i OH-), at  the  take-off  angles 30 ,45  and 80 after  passivation of the 0.19  wt% N  containing  steel at - 75, 500 and  800 mV (SCE).  The lower and the  upper  solid  lines represent  the  estimated intensity ratios  from  the  bulk composition of 0.20  wt% N  and  the  calculated ratios  from  N  covering  I 2.  17  and  20% of a monolayer at  the oxide-metal  interface. respectively.

<!-- image -->

the oxide-metal interface  are partly  occupied by  N. The  solid  curves correspond  to coverages  of  12, 17  and 20%  N at  the  potentials - 75,  500  and 800  mV  WE), respectively. The agreements  between the  measured and the  predicted angle  dependency of  the  ratios are very good.  It  appears from  Fig. 9 that these  concentrations  give the correct  angle dependency. Figure10 summarizes the  concentrations of  N  at  the  three  potentials for  the

Fig. IO. The  coverage  of nitrogen at  the  oxide-metal  interface  at  the  potentials - 75,  500 and 800 mV (SCE)  for  the  passivation times IO  min  and  2  h.

<!-- image -->

passivation times 10  min  and 2  h.  The  amount  of N  at  the  interface increases with the potential and polarization time  because  oxidation  of  the  alloy  increases with  the  potential and exposure time.

As has  been  pointed  out  above,  polarization of  the  steels at  65°C  causes growth of  pits on the low N-containing alloy  while the initiated pits  on  the  high N-containing steel are repassivated. Figure 11 shows  ESCA survey scans  recorded from  the two  alloys  after polarization to  500  mV  (WE) at  65°C.  The spectrum recorded  from the  low N-containing steel shows strong  Fe(ox)  and Cl- signals, showing that  Fe chloride corrosion  products  are formed on the  surface. Auger spectroscopy  reveals that  the  pits and borders  around them are  covered by Fe chloride. The ESCA spectra recorded  from the  high  N-containing  alloy polarized at 65°C  show  almost the same  appearance  as the spectra  recorded after polarization at  room  temperature. High resolution spectra do not  give  any new information.

The ESCA spectra  in  Figs  4  and 8  show strong  N  1s  signals located  at  the  positions of NH3  and NH:.  The intensities of  these  signals are  independent  of  the N content  of  the  steel.

Fig. 11.  ESCA survey scans recorded from  the low  and  high N-containing alloys  after polarization to  500  mV  (SCE) for  10 min at  65°C.

<!-- image -->

In  order  to  find the  origin of  NH3  and NH:,  the  N  1s and MO  3psiz signals were recorded  at 45'  take-off angle  after polarization of  the  samples  to  potentials in  the  range  - 700-800  mV (SCE),  Fig.  12. The intensities of  the  N signals can  be  compared  to  the  intensities of  the  MO signals because  the  concentration  of  MO  and thickness of  the  oxide  is independent  of  the  N content  at  each  potential. To rule out  the  possibility that NH3  and NH: emanates from the environment of  the  preparation  and handling  system,  a  low N-containing  sample was ion etched  and subsequently  transported  to  the  chamber  in  which the  electrochemical cell is enclosed  without  exposure to  the  electrolyte. The treatment  gives only  low intensity signals at  the  position  of  NH3  and NH:, Fig.  12(a). Molybdenum, as  well  as  the  other  metallic elements, are  oxidized  since the  protecting gas  in  the  chamber, in  which the  electrochemical cell is enclosed, contains  water  vapour.  Figure  12(b) and (c) shows spectra of  the  two alloys after polarization in  the  cathodic  region  ( - 700  mV)  for  1  h.  Strong  signals from NH: are obtained from  both the  low N  and the  high N-containing alloys. Because the  cathodic polarization does  not  dissolve the  metal,  it is impossible that  the  N  source  is the  nitrogen  in the  alloys. Figure  12(d) and (e) shows the  spectra recorded  after passivation of  the  two alloys

Fig. 12. N  ls/Mo 3p1,2  signals  recorded  after  polarization to potentials  in the range  -700 800 mV (SCE)  at  45' take-off  angle.

<!-- image -->

at -75  mV.  Even  in  this case  the  intensities of the  NH: signals are  relatively high and independent  of  the  alloy composition.  Polarization of  the  low  N-containing  alloy to  800  mV gives N signals from NH3  and NH:,  but  in  this case  the  surface is pitted so  that the  intensity comparison is not  reliable.

The  analysis shows that  the  detected  compounds,  NH3 and NH:, are  probably not formed  by reaction  between N  dissolved in  the  alloys and the  protons  in  the  electrolyte. Instead  it is  concluded that  most of  these  compounds are  formed during  polarization by electrochemical reduction  of  NO; and NO; ions  present as  contaminants  in  the  electrolyte. Table 2 shows the  contents  of  these  species in  the  water  used  for  the  experiments. It  also shows that  the  water  contains  NH: ions, which can  directly be  adsorbed  on the  surfaces. In spite of  the  fact that  the  concentrations of  the contaminants  are  very  low,  the  amounts are  at least three  orders  of  magnitude larger than  the  amounts detected on the  surfaces. However, it will be stated below that  NH3  and NH: are  formed during  the  pitting and repassivation processes, but  these  species are  formed in  the  pitted areas  which only  cover  a  small part  of the  surface  and therefore do not markedly contribute to  the  intensities. Further,  it will be concluded that  NH3  and NH: are  dissolved into  the  electrolyte.

## DISCUSSION

The electrochemical analysis performed in  this study  confirms  what is already  known from practical use  of  super-austenitic steels, that  the  corrosion  properties are  improved by alloying with  nitrogen. It is basically the  resistance to  localized corrosion  which is improved. Dynamic  polarization of  the  two Fe-20Cr-20Ni-6Mo steels with  high  (0.19 wt%)  and low (0.01 wt%)  N  concentrations  show  no influence of N  on the  passivation kinetics during exposure in an aqueous  solution  containing  0.5  M Cl-  at pH z 1.  The  shapes of the polarization curves  are  almost  identical. Furthermore,  the  composition  and the  thickness of the  initially formed  passive  films  are  independent of the  N  content. On  the  other  hand, polarization at  room  temperature  for  prolonged  time  at constant  potential shows noticeable fluctuations of the  current  on the  low N-containing alloy. It  is  also  possible to observe fluctuations of  the  current  on the  high  N-containing  alloy, but  the  current  spikes are  not  so easily distinguishable as  on the  low N-containing  steel. At 65°C the  influence of  N  is even more  pronounced;  the  high  N-containing steel is  passivated, while  the  low N-containing steel first shows  a tendency to be passivated  and then after  a few seconds the  current increases due to  development  of  stationary growing pits. This  shows that  even the  passive film formed on the  0.19  wt%  N is not  stable at  high  temperatures; it is broken down  locally and healed  by repassivation. In  spite of  the  fact that  the  metal  composition  of  the  two alloys is the  same,  the  pits initiated on the  low N-containing  steel grow so  that  the  steel becomes heavily  attacked.  The  influence  of N  on  the repassivation process  is, as suggested  by Osozawa  and Okata:  that  N reacts with  H+  ions  in  the  pits during  formation  of  NH3  and NH:.  The reaction causes  a  decrease  of  the  acidity in  the  pits and repassivation is thereby enhanced. In the  following  the  results obtained  in  this work  will be used to elucidate a mechanism  for  the  reaction path  of  nitrogen.

The angle  dependent ESCA measurements  show that  N is enriched  at  the  metal-oxide interface. It  has been shown  that  the enrichment of N  on the  high N-containing steel increases with  potential and polarization time.  The coverage  obtained  during  polarization at  - 75  mV (SCE) for  10  min is  12%, while  it is 27%  after polarization at  800  mV for  2  h. These amounts of  accumulated N atoms correspond  to  the  amounts of  N present in  30-70  A

thick metallic  layers.  Nitrogen  is  consequently enriched at the interface  by  anodic segregation. It  is expected  that  enrichment of  N  under the  passive film  contributes to  the repassivation process  at  an  early stage  and inhibits the  development of  growing pits.

From  surface  analysis experiments  it has been suggested  that  nitride compounds are formed  at  the  metal/oxide  interface. Clayton et  uI.'.'~-'~,~~ have suggested  that  nitrogen segregates to  the  oxide-metal  interface, where it forms a  relatively stable interstitial nitride phase of  the  type  CrN  containing  Ni and MO.  The  high  Cr concentration  in  the  nitride provides  a  rich supply  of  Cr  for  oxide  film formation.' Marcus et  ~1.'~~' 1*27 studied austenitic stainless steels (Fe-l  7Cr-13Ni) containing  MO  and/or  N (0.074 15  wt  %) exposed to  0.5  M H2S04. They  suggest  that  a Cr-rich  nitride is  formed as  dispersed particles in  the  passive film. It  was suggested  that  the  nitride phase replaces Cr20s and thereby  deteriorates the passivation properties. The solubility of  N in  austenite at  room  temperature  is very  low and it could  therefore be  expected  that  nitride particles are  formed at  the  oxide-metal  interface. However,  the  angle-dependent  ESCA analysis, performed in  this work, clearly shows that the  main contribution to  the  recorded  N  signal is the  presence  of  N atoms in  a  monolayer under the  passive  film. It  does not  give  any support  for  the  idea  that  nitride particles are present  in  neither  the  oxide nor at  the  metal-oxide interface; a distribution of particles should  not  give  the  obtained  angle  dependency  of  the  intensity ratio between the  nitrogen and the  oxygen signals.

The  quantitative ESCA analysis  performed  in  this  work  and from  thermodynamic considerations it will be  established that  N atoms are  enriched  in  the  interface between the metal  and the  passive film due to  anodic  segregation. It will be  concluded  that Cr nitrides are not formed  as  a thin  layer  during  passivation. Table 3 shows the  binding  energies of  the signals from  the  elements of nitrides, oxides  and the  alloys  after  passivation. The  free energies28S29 of formation of some  of the  compounds are  also  given.  The  nitrides were formed by reactive sputtering in  lO-4  Torr NH3  gas  and then  directly moved  to  the  ESCA instrument  without  exposure to  air.

The binding  energy of  the  N  1s  peak determined from the  polarization experiments  is 397.7 + 0.2  eV.  This  finding excludes  the  possibility that CrN  exists as  a  separate phase  at  the interface, because  the  binding  energy  of  the  N  1s  signal recorded  from CrN  is  1.1 eV lower than  the  N  1s  signal from the  passivated steel. The analysis of  the  passive film  reveals that the  oxide  phase  consists mainly of  Cr and Fe oxides  uniformly  distributed in  the  inner  oxide layer.  If  Cr2N  or any  other high Cr-containing  nitride is  formed  as an intermediate compound at  the  metal/oxide  interface the  following  reaction is expected  to  take  place:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The free energy for the reaction at room temperature is AG= -213.6+AG(2Fe+N)kJmol-I. The  lAG/ value 213.6kJmol-' is  much larger than the  value  of IAG(2Fe+  N)I,  because pure Fe nitride is  not formed. Thus, from  a thermodynamic  point  of  view  Cr2N  cannot be  formed at  the  interface as  long  as  oxygen is available.

Table 3  shows that pure  Ni3N and Fe4N are  not  expected  to  be  formed.  However,  these compounds may  be stabilized by Cr and MO.  Jack29  has estimated  the free  energy of formation  of Ni2M03N to  -75  kJ  mol-' instead  of  + 30  kJ  mol-' for pure Ni3N. Willenbruch  et  al.' have suggested  a  mixed nitride at  the  interface. It  will be shown  below that  the  MO  content  at  the  interface is too  low to  form Ni2M03N.

Table 3.  The binding  energies and free energies of  formation  of  nitrides and oxides  at  room temperature

| Compound                     | N ISBE (eV)   | Metallic element BE (eV)                                                  | AGr (kJmol-t)   | Reference   |
|------------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|-------------|
| Fe-Cr-Ni-MoN alloy (passive) | 397.7kO.2     | 2~~~~ of Fe,Cr, Ni:706.9, 573.9,852.9; 3d5i2 and 3p3/2 of Mo: 227.6,393.6 |                 |             |
| N dissolvedinthealloy        | 397.3fO.l     |                                                                           |                 |             |
| Fe4N                         |               |                                                                           | +3.7            | 28          |
| Fe203                        |               | 2py2 of Fe3+: 711.2                                                       | - 742.3         | 28          |
| CrN                          | 396.4         | 2p3,2 of Cr: 575.4                                                        | -92.7           | 28          |
| Cr2N                         | 397.5         | 2p3,2 of Cr:574.5                                                         | - 102.2         | 28          |
| Cr203                        |               | 2p3,2 of Cr3+: 577.2                                                      | - 1058.1        | 28          |
| Ni,N                         |               |                                                                           | +30             | 29          |
| Mo2N                         |               |                                                                           | -54.8           | 28          |
| MoN                          | 397.8         | 3d=,i2 and 3~312 of MO: 228.6, 394.7                                      |                 |             |
| NizMo3N                      |               |                                                                           | -75             | 29          |
| Ni3ModNz                     | 397.8         | 2~~~~ ofNi:853.1 3d512 and 3p3,2 ofMo: 228.4,394.4                        |                 |             |

Previously,  it  has been predicted'7q23*24930 that  the composition of the metal phase changes  during  anodic  dissolution and passivation. This  behaviour  is demonstrated in  Fig. 13  using  the  data  from this work. Figure  13(a) shows the  composition of  the  alloys (except for  N).  The measured metal  compositions of  the  two alloys after polarization at  the  three potentials for 10  min and 2  h exposure are  shown  in  Fig.  13(b)  and (c), respectively. The compositions  are  determined from the  recorded  intensities taking  into  account  the  electron yield factors, densities of  the  species, attenuation lengths of  the  electrons and thickness of

Fig.  13.  The composition  of  the  metal  phase  in  at%: (a) the  composition  of  the  alloy; (b, c)  the apparent composition measured  after  polarization for 10  min  and 2  h,  respectively; (d)  the estimated composition  of  the  outermost  atomic  layer of  the  metal  phase  under  the  passive film.

<!-- image -->

the  oxide layers. It  appears that  during  passivation the  composition of the  metal phase under the passive  film  changes markedly. Nickel is  enriched  while  Fe, Cr and MO are depleted at  the  interface. The decrease  of  the  Cr  and  the  MO  contents is due to  enrichment  of these  elements  in  the  passive  film. Iron,  on the  other  hand, is  selectively dissolved. The figures show that  N does  not  influence the  metal  composition  under  the  passive film. (The  N content  is not  shown in  order  to  make  it easy  to  compare the  compositions  of  the  two alloys.) The  measured  composition is  called  'apparent' because chemical  gradients exist in  the metal  phase  close to  the  boundary.

It  has been suggested23'24 that  the  metal  composition varies over three  atomic planes under the oxide film;  an error  function  was  adopted. An  attempt to concentrate  the composition variation over one or two planes  results in  unrealistic compositions (the  Cr content  becomes negative). Concentration  variation over  a  larger distance than  three atomic planes  should  give  an unrealistic diffusion coefficient.24 Figure 13(d)  shows the  estimated composition  in  the  outermost  metallic layer located under  the  passive film. The low  contents of  Cr and MO  in  that  layer exclude  from the  stoichiometric point  of  view  the  idea that  pure Cr and/or MO nitrides are  formed. The  statement  is  built on the  fact  that  the  binding energies of  Cr  and MO  bound to  N in  nitrides are  rather close to  the  binding  energies of  their metallic  states, Table  3. If Cr  and  MO nitrides exist  at the interface  the intensity contributions from  these  signals are therefore  included  in  the  intensities of the signals representing  their  metallic  states. As  indicated  above,  the angle-dependent ESCA measurement  shows that  N  is  uniformly distributed at  the  interface. The surface  analysis also  predicts that  the  N  atoms at  the  interface interact with  their nearby atoms in  the  oxide and metal  phases  because,  as  shown  in  Table 3,  the  signal representing N dissolved in  the alloy  is  located  at 0.4eV  lower binding energy than the N 1s signal  recorded after passivation. (The binding  energy  of  N in  the  alloy was obtained  by analysis of  the  high  Ncontaining  steel after ion  etching.) The conclusion  is  that  N  segregates anodically  to  the interface during  passivation.

The depletion  of  Cr below the  passive film  implies that  the  metal  has  to  be  oxidized  to some extent  before  the  film  can be healed. It  is not  possible by ESCA to  study  directly the composition  of the metal surface  in the pits. Analysis23724 of the metal phase after polarization to the active  region of the alloys  close  to the  corrosion  potential  shows enrichment  of  Ni,  MO  and probably  also Cr on the  surface caused  by  selective dissolution of Fe.  Molybdenum is  the  alloying element which influences most markedly the  dissolution rate of  stainless steels at  active potentials. It has  been  suggested23,24 that  a  thin intermetallic phase  formed on the  surface during  active dissolution increases the  activation energy and thereby  lowers  the  dissolution rate  of  the  alloy.

The mechanism  for  selective dissolution and enrichment  of  the  alloying elements  on the surface at  the  active potentials can be  used  to  explain the  synergistic effect between MO  and Non  the  pitting properties of  stainless steels. Studies'7.25 have shown that  a  steel of  the  type Fe-20Cr-20Ni  (the same Cr and Ni contents  as  used  in  this work,  but  without  MO)  is much more sensitive to  pitting corrosion  than  the  corresponding  MO-containing alloys with  and without  N.  At room  temperature  the  pitting potential of  the  MO-free alloy is about 500  mV (SCE), while  the  MO-containing alloy  even without N  is  passive  up to  the  transpassive potential (initiation and repassivation of  pits occur). The pitting process is auto-catalysed by hydration  of  dissolved cations  in  the  pit; the  acidity in  the  pit is  thereby  increased  by the formation of solvated  H+ ions.  During the  initiation phase of  pitting, exchange of  ions between the  pit volume and the  surrounding  electrolyte takes  place, because  no membrane

of  corrosion  products  covers  the  pit. As long  as  the  growth rate of  the  pit is low the  pH  value of  the  electrolyte in  the  pit does  not  change noticeably because  solvated H+  ions  diffuse out of  the  pit volume. On  the  other  hand,  if the  hydration  rate  is rapid  due to  high  dissolution rate  of  the  alloy the  pH  value  of  the  liquid at  the  pit surface decreases. The mobility  of  the solvated  cations  is relatively low and the  diffusion path  increases with  the  depth  of  the  pit. Thus, the  repassivation reaction  is inhibited when  the  pH  of  the  pit surface  drops  below a critical value, pHcrit.

The growth rate of  the  pits formed on the  MO-containing steels is lower  than  on the  Mofree alloys due to  enrichment  of  MO  and the  other  alloying elements  in  their metallic state on the metal surface.  The  low propagation rate  of the initiated pits  formed  on  the Mocontaining  alloys allows  equalization of  the  concentrations of  the  cations in  the  pit. The local hydration  at  the  surface becomes thereby  limited so  that  repassivation can  take  place. The role of  N is that it reacts with  H+  ions  during  formation  of  NH3  and  NH:,  as  suggested by Osozawa  and Okato,4 and compensates to  some extent  for  the  drop in  pH  value  caused by hydration.  The probability of  repassivation is thereby  increased. The influence of  N was demonstrated in  experiments  performed at  65°C in  this work;  the  pits initiated on the  low  Ncontaining  steel propagate due to  increased  acidity while  repassivation takes  place  on the high  N-containing  steel because  the  pH  value  exceeds  pHcrit.

It has  been reported  that  N may  have a  detrimental effect on the  corrosion  properties of ordinary  stainless steels of  the  type  17Cr-13Ni containing 3Mo' and  without  MO' exposed to  0.5  M  H2S04  + 0.8-l 5 M  NaCl. It was found that adding  0.15 wt%  N to  the  steels causes increased  dissolution rate  in  the  active  potential range,  increased  current  density  in  the passive range, and a  decreased  pitting potential. First, the  findings seem to  be  opposite to  the results of this  work.  However,  the model  presented  above  explains  at  least partly  the behaviour  of the low  alloyed steels: the active  dissolution rate is  high due  to low concentrations  of  alloying elements;  the  pH  on the  free  surface  during  active dissolution and in  the  initiated pits  of the  N-containing steel becomes  higher  than on the low Ncontaining  steel, but  still below pH,,it; the  dissolution rate in  the  active state is expected  to increase with  PH.~~

## CONCLUSIONS

High alloyed  stainless  teels, 20Cr-20Ni-6Mo, containing  0.011  wt% N  and 0.19  wt% N  have been exposed to  0.1  M HCl + 0.4  M  NaCl  for  10  min and 2  h at  potentials in  the range - 75-800  mV  (SCE).  It  is concluded that:

1. Nitrogen influences markedly the  pitting corrosion  properties of  the  steels. At 65°C the  low N-containing  steel is severely pitted while  the  high  N-containing  steel is passivated.
2.  The  shapes of the dynamic  polarization  diagrams  of the steels recorded after activation are  the  same and independent  of  the  N content  of  the  steel.
3.  The composition and the  thickness of  the  passive films formed on the  steels at  room temperature  are  independent  of  the  N content  of  the  steel.
4. Nitrogen segregates anodically  to  the  metal-oxide  interface during  passivation. The enrichment of  N increases with  the  potential. The amounts correspond to  12%  and 27%  of an  atomic  layer at  - 75  and 800  mV  (SCE),  respectively. It is concluded  that Cr nitride is not formed.
5.  It is  suggested  that  the  synergistic effect between MO  and N is due to  enrichment of

MO, Ni and Cr at  the  metal-electrolyte interface of  initiated pits. The growth rate of  the  pits on the  MO-containing steel becomes lower  than  on the  MO-free alloy. Nitrogen  is expected to  compensate for  the  pH  drop in  the  pits by reaction with  H+  and formation of  NH3  and NH:. Repassivation  is  enhanced  by the  increased  pH  value  in  the  pits  and the  higher concentration  of  Cr,  which forms the  passive film.

Acknow/edgement.r-The Swedish  Research  Council  for  Engineering  Sciences  (TFR)  and Sandvik  AB  are  gratefully acknowledged for  financial  support  and  producing  the steels for  the  experiments, respectively.

## REFERENCES

- I  0. Steensland, Iron  Steel  42. 104 (1969).
2. A. G.  Hartline, Met. Trans.  5. 2271  (1974).
3. M.  Janik-Czachor, E. Lunarska and  Z. Szklaraska-Smialowska, Corrosion  31,  349  (1975).
4. K.  Osozawa and  N.  Okato, USA-Japan Seminar, Pa.rsivity and  its  Breakdown on  Fe  and  Fe-hose Alloys, Honolulu, 1975 (eds R. W.  Staehle and  H.  Okada), p. 135.  NACE, Houston, TX  (1976).
5. J.  E. Truman, M.  J.  Coleman and  K.  R. Pirt, Br.  Corros.  J. 12,  236 (1977).
6. R. F. A. Jargelius and  T. Wallin. 10th  Scandinavian  Corrosion  Congress, Stockholm, p. 161 (1986).
7. R. D. Willenbruch,  C. R. Clayton,  M.  Oversluizen, D. Kim and  Y. Lu, Corr0.r.  Sci. 31, 179 (1990).
8. R. Bandy and  D. van  Rooyen. Corrosion  39,  227  (1983).
9. 0. Steensland, Corrosion Prevent. Control  15.  25  (1968).
- IO. A. Sadough Vanini, R. Chikhi  and  P. Marcus, UK  Corrosion  and  Eurocorr-94, Bournemouth (1994).
- 1 I. A. Sadough Vanini, J.-P.  Audouard and  P. Marcus, Corros. Sri.  36, 1825 (1994).
12. C. R. Clayton  and  K. G.  Martin, High  Nitrogen  Steels.  Proc.  Int.  Conf.. Lille (eds  J.  Fact and  A. Hendry),  p. 256 (1988).
13. Y. Lu,  R. Bandy,  C. R. Clayton  and  R. C. Newman, J.  Electrochem. Sot. 130  (8), 1774  (1983).
14. R. C. Newman, Y. Lu, C. R. Clayton  and  R. Bandy, Proc.  Int.  Congr. on Metallic  Corrosion, Toronto,  Vol. 3, p. 394 (1984).
15. R. Bandy,  Y. C. Lu. C. R. Clayton  and  R. C. Newman, Equilibrium  Diugramr  and  Localized  Corrosion (eds R. P. Frankenthal and  J.  Kruger),  p.  369. Electrochemical  Sociey, Pennington,  NJ  (1984).
16. C. R. Clayton,  L. Rosenzweig, M.  Oversluizen  and  Y. C. Lu, Inhibition and  Passivation (eds E. McCafferty and  R. J.  Brodd),  p. 369. Electrochemical  Society,  Pennington.  NJ  (1986).
17. L. Wegrelius  and  I.  Olefjord, Muter. Sri.  Forum  185-188, 347-356 (1995).
18. B. Brox  and  I.  Olefjord, Surf. Intet@e Anal. 13. 3 (1988).
19. D. N. Hendrickson, J.  M.  Hollander and  W.  Jolly.  Inorg. Chem.  8,  2642  (1969).
20. W.  E. Swartz  and  R. A. Alfonso, J. Electron  Spectrosc. Relat.  Phenom.  4,  351  (1974).
21. I. Olefjord and  L. Wegrelius,  Corr0.r.  Sci.  31. 89 (1990).
22. I.  Olefjord. Proc.  Symp.  The  Application cf Surface Ana1y.yi.c Methoris  to Environmental/Material Interactions. Seattle  (1990).
23. I.  Olefjord, B. Brox  and  U. Jelvestam, J.  Electrochem. Sot. 132,  2854  (1985).
24. B. Brox  and  1.  Olefjord, Proc.  Stainless  Stee1'84, Goteborg, p. 134.  The  Institute of Metals  (1984).
25. L.  Wegrelius and I. Olefjord. Electrochemical and Swface Analyses of Stainless Steels E.xposed to Hydrochloric Acid, to be published.
26. C. R. Clayton  and  Y. C. Lu, J. Electrochem. Sot. 133(12), 2465  (1986).
27. P. Marcus and  M.  E. Busell, Appl.  SW/:  Sci.  59,  7 (1992).
28. I. Barin, Thermochemical Data  of  Pure  Substances. VCH. Weinheim (1993).
29. K. H. Jack, Met. Powder  Rep.  42(7-8), 478  (1987).
30. I. Olefjord, Muter. Sci.  Engng  42, 161 (1980).
31. K.  F. Bonhoeffer and  K.  E. Heusler, 2. Phys.  Chem. N.  F.  8.  390  (1956).