## MECHANISM OF  INTERGRANULAR CORROSION OF  A1-Cu ALLOYS*

## J.  R. GALVELE and S. M. DE DE  MICHELI

Comisi6n  National de  Energia At6mica,  Departamento de  Metalurgia, Avda.  del  Libertador 8250, Buenos  Aires, Argentina

Abstract--The anodic  behaviour of  pure  AI and some specially prepared  AI-Cu alloys has  been studied to  check  the  mechanism of  intergranular corrosion of  aged  AI--4%Cu.  A clear relationship between  pitting and  intergranular corrosion has  been  found. Intergranular corrosion only  occurs  in the  presence of  certain anions, and  over a  narrow  range of  potentials. Difference in pitting potentials, rather than difference in electrode potentials, is the  main  factor in  producing intergranular corrosion of  AI--4%Cu. The conditions of  heat  treatment, solution composition, and potential, at  which intergranular corrosion appears, have  been  established.

R6sum6--On a 6tudi6 le  comportement  de  AI et  de  quelques alliages AI-Cu sp6cialement pr6par6s grin de  v6rifier le  m6canisme  de  la  corrosion intergranulaire de  A1-4%  Cu vieilli. On a trouv6  une relation nette entre piqfaration et corrosion intergranulaire. Celle-ci n'a lieu qu'en pr6sence de  certalns anions et  dans  un  intervalle 6troit de  potentiel. La diff6rence des  potentiels de  piqflr'ation, plus que celle des  potentiels d'61ectrode, est le  facteur essentiel de  la corrosion intercristalline de  A1--4%  Cu. On a  6tabli les circonstances de  traitement thermique, de  composition de  solution et  de  potentiel de l'apparition de  la corrosion intercristalline.

Zusammenfassung--Das anodische  Verhalten von reinem  Aluminium  und einigen, besonders  aufbereiteten AI-Cu Legierungen  ist untersucht worden, um  den Mechanismus  yon Korngrenzenkorrosion yon  gealtertem AI--4%Cu zu  pri.ifen. Es  wurde  ein deutliches Verh~iltnis zwischen Lochfrass und Korngrenzenkorrosion gefunden.  Korngrenzenkorrosion erfolgt nut  bei  Vorhandensein  yon bestimmten Anionen  und  tiber einen engen  Potentialbereich. Unterschied in  Lochfrass Potentialen zu einem  gr6sseren Grade  als Unterschied in Elektroden Potentialen ist die Hauptursache, Korngrenzenkorrosion von AI-4%Cu  hervorzurufen. Die  Bedingungen  for  W~mebehandlung,  L6sungszusammensetzung  und  Potential, bei  welchem Korngrenzenkorrosion erscheint, wurden  festgelegt.

## INTRODUCTION

THE INTERGRANULAR corrosion of aged A1-4%Cu alloys  has been the subject of numerous  investigations. 1-7  It  is  generally agreed  that the  microstructure of  the  aged A1-Cu  alloy  is  the  one represented in Fig.  1.  At this  stage  of  heat  treatment the changes  in  the  structure of  the  grain bodies are  not  yet  detectable by  c o m m o n   metallographic  techniques, and for  the  present purposes  are  usually considered as a single phase. At the  grain boundaries, on  the  other hand,  the  precipitation rate is  higher, and two phases  can  be observed, the  0 phase, or  Ai2Cu,  surrounded by the  other phase,  a Cu-depleted zone,  which,  according to  the  equilibrium diagram  (s), should  approximate  to  AI-0.2 ~oCu.  Consequentlyin the  generally accepted mechanism  of  intergranular corrosion 1-7  the  aged Al-4%Cu  alloy  is  described as a three-phase system  having anodic  and cathodic zones.  The copper-depleted zone along  the  grain  boundaries is

*Paper  presented at  the  4th  International Congress  on Metallic Corrosion, Amsterdam, 7-14 September  1969. Manuscript received 8  December 1969.

FIG. I. Schematic representation f  the  mierostrueture of  an  aged  AI--4%Cu  alloy.

<!-- image -->

the  anode (phase  I), whilst the  grain  bodies  (phase  II)  and the intermetallic AI2Cu (phase III) are  cathodes. The  intergranular corrosion of  AI-Cu would  then be  a  process in  which a very  small  anode is  in  contact with  a large  cathode. In support  of  this mechanism measurements  made by various authors s-5  showed that during  corrosion there was a  difference in  potentials of  the  order of  100  mV  between  the  grain boundaries and the  grain  bodies. Nevertheless, a mechanism of  anodic  and cathodic zones  does not  explain why the  presence of  C1- is  necessary to  get  intergranular corrosion, and intergranular corrosion should  occur  in  almost  any  corrosive medium. Therefore any mechanism of  intergranular corrosion of  aged AI--4%Cu  must explain the  action of the  CI-  ions.

The purpose  of  the  present work was to  find  out  the  function of  the  Cl-in  the intergranular corrosion of  AI-Cu alloys. Specimens  of each  of the  three phases  present in  the  aged  AI-4%Cu  alloy were  studied in  C1- solutions. It  has  been  found  that the intergranular corrosion of the aged A1-4%Cu alloy  appears  only over a certain potential range, and that it is  related to  the  process of  pitting of  AI.

## EXPERIMENTAL

Specimens of  solubilized Al-4%Cu  were used to  simulate the  behaviour  of  the grain bodies of  aged  AI-4%Cu. For  the  study of  the  other two  phases  the  intermetallic A12Cu and A1-0.2%Cu  alloy were  used.

Measurements  were  performed on  alloys  prepared with  A199.99% and Cu 99.999%. The analytical composition  of  the  nominal alloy was, for  Al-4%Cu, 4.07%Cu;  for  A1-0.2%Cu,  0.27%Cu;  and for  the  intermetallic Al2Cu, 56.1%Cu. Several  potentiostatic measurements on  A1 99.99%  and  A1 99.9999%  were  also performed.

The specimens  were prepared  by cutting coupons  of  10 ×  30 mm from a 1  mm thick  cold-rolled sheet  of  the  alloys. The solubilized AI--4%Cu  was  prepared  by heating the  specimens  for  2  h at  550°C and water  quenching.  The aged specimens were  prepared by  heating the  solubilized specimens  for 3  h  at  176°C;and the  over-aged

specimens  were obtained by heating the  solubilized material for  1  h at  430°C.  The AI-0.2%Cu  and the  pure  A1 specimens  were annealed  for  2 h at  600°C and water quenched.  The edges  and the  surface of  the  specimens  were covei'ed with  a curedepoxy  resin, leaving an uncovered  area  of  about  1  cm  =.  The specimens  were  electropolished in  a HCIO4  acetic anhydride bath, and stored in  a desiccator for  a  few days before the  experiments.

The specimens  of  the  intermetallic AlsCu were cast  rods  of  about  6  mm  dia. The surface  of the rods was  covered  with the cured-epoxy  resin, and one end was mechanically taper polished with  diamond powder,  leaving an  exposed  area  of  about 1  cm  2.

The solutions were prepared  with  analytical grade  reagents and were deaerated s with  purified N~.

The potential was controlled with  a Tacussel PRT  20-2-M potentiostat. All  the measurements  were made  at  25°C in a Pyrex  glass  cell, with a platinum  counter electrode. The potentials were  measured, through  a  Luggin  capillary, with  a  saturated calomel  electrode, and referred to  the  normal  hydrogen  electrode scale (nhe).

## RESULTS

## Anodic polarization curves  in NaCI

Polarization curves  were obtained  for  each of the three  phases,  in solutions containing various concentrations of  NaCI.  The measurements  were  made in  steps of 10 mV, waiting at  each  point until a  stationary current was observed. Figure 2  shows a typical example of  the  polarization curves  obtained. The results with  pure  AI were similar to the ones  reported by Kaesche 1°  and Bond et al., n and the  same type  of anodic polarization curve was  obtained  with solubilized AI-4%Cu,  AI-0.2%Cu, and AI=Cu. In  all cases  the  specimens  showed a passive range, where no attack was observed. But,  as the  potential was increased to  the  critical potential, there  was a

FIG. 2. Anodic polarization curve  of  99.99% AI in  deaerated 0.1M NaCl solution. Ep: potential at  which  pitting starts.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

rain

FIG. 3.  Behaviour  of  99.99%A1  in  deaerated IM  NaC1  solution when the  potential is  switched  from the  passive range  to the  pitting range.  The pitting potential was - 0'53 V(nhe).

marked increase in  the  current, and  pitting was then  detected on  the  surface. Although the  existence of  critical potentials for  pitting is  supported  by various  authors, 1°-15 recent work has  thrown  doubts  on the  existence of  such  potentials, 16-~8  since  pitting does  not  occur  until after an  induction period.

In  view of  this discrepancy of  opinions, two types  of  experiments were made to study  the  pitting of  A1 in  C1- solutions.

In a first series of  experiments 99-99%A1  was immersed in  deaerated 1M  NaCI and the  potential of  the  specimen  was switched every  10  to  20 min from  the  passive range  to  the  pitting range  (Fig. 3).  When  the  specimen  is  held  at  a low potential the current decreases to  very  small  values, but  if the  potential is then  switched to  a  higher value, which is  in  the  pitting range, the  current increases by two or  more orders  of magnitude, and  pits form  on  the  surface of  the  metal. If the  potential is  switched back to  the  low initial value, the  pitting stops  and the  metal  repassivates. This  experiment can  be  repeated several times  on the  same specimen  with  the  same results. If  pitting of  A1  in  CI- solutions is  a time-dependent process, independent  of  the  potential, once  pitting has  started it would  not  be  expected to  stop when the  potential is decreased.

A  second  series of  experiments consisted in  recording the  changes  in  the  anodic current for  5  h when specimens  of  99.99%A1  were  held  at  various constant potentials in 1M  deaerated NaC1  (Fig.  4).  When  the  potential was maintained  in  the  range --0.76 V(nhe) and  --0.53 V(nhe) the c.d.  after  5  h  remained below  1 ~A/cm  2, and no pitting was observed. But with  a potential only  10  mV  higher than  --  0.53  V the  c.d. increased by more than  three orders  of  magnitude  and pitting commenced. These  experiments showed that if there is  an  induction time  for pitting of  AI,  a  change in  potential of 10  mV should  decrease the  induction time  by at  least four  orders of

rain

FIG.  4. Current-time curves for 99.99%A1 in  deaerated 1M NaCI solution at  various potentials.

<!-- image -->

magnitude.  It  can be concluded  therefore that  pitting of  AI is  related to a critical potential which does  not  depend on an induction period.

## Pitting potentials

The critical pitting potentials of  the  three phases  and of  pure  Al in  various concentrations of  deaerated NaC1  are  shown in  Fig.  5.  The pitting potential for  all the three phases  is  linearly related to  logarithm of  the  activity of  NaC1, and in  the  range 0.01  to  5M  NaC1  the  following relations were obtained:

Phase  I,  and high  purity AI:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Epl is  the  breakdown potential in  V(nhe).

Phase  II:

Phase  III:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In all  the  cases  studied  the breakdown potentials for  the  Cu-rich  phases  were about 100 mV higher  than the values  for  specimens  with lower Cu  content. The pitting potentials of  the  solubilized A1-4  % Cu were  similar to  those of  the  intermetallic AI2Cu, and no difference was observed in  the  pitting potentials of  the  AI-0.2 %Cu  and high  purity AI.

## Influence of  heat  treatment on intergranular corrosion

With the  results shown in  Fig.  5  it should  be  possible to  predict the  behaviour of heat-treated A1--4%Cu  alloys in  CI-  solutions at  different potentials. As shown in  this

I

FIG.  5. Effect of  the  chloride concentration on the  pitting potential of  pure  aluminium and various  AI-Cu  alloys in  deaerated  NaCI  solutions.

<!-- image -->

figure, there  is  a range of  potentials where an alloy with  a Cu-depleted  zone  will show attack  in  such  zone  while  the  two others  remain passive. This  sort of  behaviour  should be  expected  in  a  wide  range  of  CI-  concentrations. For  example,  an  aged  A1-4%Cu alloy (Fig.  1)  will  corrode along the grain  boundaries  over a range of 100 mV while  the grain  bodies  remain passive. In  this case  corrosion will concentrate in  the  few-micronsthick  Cu-depleted  zone.

The results for  aged AI-4%Cu confirm  such  prediction, and Fig.  6 shows a typical example of an anodic polarization curve in deaerated IM  NaCI;  in this  particular experiment  the  potential was changed in  steps  of  10  mV every  minute.  The values  of the expected  breakdown  potentials of  the  grain  boundaries  and  of  the  grain  bodies

FIG. 6.  Anodic polarization curve  of  aged Al--4%Cu  in  deaerated  1M  NaCI  solutions. Measurements made  in steps of 10 mV/min. Ep~: pitting  potential  measured  for AI-0.2%Cu. Epu: pitting potential of  solubilizcd AI--4%Cu.

<!-- image -->

F~6.7.  Anodic polarization curve  and type  of  attack for  aged AI-4°oCu iffjdeaerated I M NaCI  solution. Exposure  conditions: a = 20 rain  at --  0.35  V(nhe),  intergranular corrosion  plus tunnel-like pitting, section  (120 x); b  = 20 min  at --  0-43  V(nhe), intergranular corrosion, section (120 x);  c  = 90 rain  at  -  0.66  V(nhe),  specimen  not corroded, normal  view (30 x ).

<!-- image -->

FIG. 9.  Polarization curve  and type  of  attack of  solubilized Al--4°/oCu  in  deaerated 1M  NaCI solution, a = 5  rain at  --  0.26  V(nhe),  pitting corrosion (30 x );  b  = 90 min at --  0.46  V(nhe),  no corrosion except  for  the  pits  produced during  electropolishing (30 ×).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(b)

FIG. 11.  Polarization curve  and type  of  attack of  over-aged AI-4%Cu  in  deaerated IM  NaCI  solution, a =  10 min at --  0.44  V(nhe),  generalized pitting (30 ×); b  = 90 min  at  --  0'66 V(nhe), no  corrosion except for  pits produced  during electropolishing (30 × ).

<!-- image -->

FIG.  13. Type of  attack of  aged AI-4%Cu  in 1M  NaNO3 solution, exposed 1 h  at + 1.85  V(nhe). Pitting nucleates at the  grain boundaries but  no  intergranular corrosion was observed (I00  ×).

are  also included. It was found  that when the  first breakdown  potential is reached, an increase in  c.d.  occurs, and intergranular corrosion begins.  Increasing further the potential results in  a slowdown in  the  current increase, probably  due  to  the  narrow front in  which  the  attack is  taking place, but  when the  second  breakdown  potential is reached  there is  a  new increase in  current and corrosion of  the  grain bodies begins.

Similar results were obtained in  other experiments where  the  potential was maintained constant, and Fig. 7 shows the  type  of  corrosion observed  for  aged  AI-4%Cu in  IM  deaerated NaCI,  under  constant potential. Specimen  c was exposed  for  90 min at  a potential of --  0.66  V(nhe),  and did  not  show  any type  of  attack. Another specimen  b exposed  for  20 min at  --  0.43  V(nhe) showed intergranular corrosion. And a  third specimen  a  exposed  for 20  min  at  --  0.35  V(nhe), showed corrosion at  the grain boundaries and  in  the  grain bodies. The attack in  the  grain bodies took  the  form of  tunnels, similar to  the  ones  described by various authors for  pure  AI. 19-21  These experiments were repeated with  several other  specimens  of  aged  AI-4%Cu  and the same relation between  the  potential applied and the  type  of  corrosion was always obtained.

The data  in  Fig. 5 can  also  be  applied to  predict the  kind  of  corrosion for  other heat  treatments. A  solubilized AI-4%Cu, for  example,  has  only  one  phase  (Fig. 8), and in  this case  localized corrosion should  appear  at  potentials higher  than Epn, but  the  metal  should  remain  passive at  lower  potentials. This  is confirmeti  n  Fig. 9, where  90 min exposure  at  --  0.46  V(nhe)  did  not  produce  any  attack, except  for  the small pits produced  during electropolishing of  the  specimens. But  after 5  min  exposure at  --  0.26  V(nhe)  severe pitting was observed.

In  the  over-aged condition, on the  other hand,  the  grain bodies show a  two-phase structure, as  schematically represented in  Fig. 10.  According to  Fig. 5  an  alloy with this microstructure should  suffer general corrosion at  potentials h;gher than Ep~. This  was experimentally confirmed  (Fig.  11),  and  a  specimen exposed at a  potential of --  0.44  V(nhe) showed severe  pitting, while  another specimen  exposed  for  90 min

FIG.  8. Schematic representation of  the microstructure of  solubilized AI-4%Cu alloy. Only  one  phase  is present.

<!-- image -->

FIG.  10.  Schematic  representation of  the  microstructure of  over-aged AI--4°,.oCu alloy. Only  AI-0-2%  Cu and  AI2Cu are  present.

<!-- image -->

at  --  0.66  V(nhe)  was unattacked. This  type  of  behaviour  explains why Farmery and Evans  2  found  that the  "light zone"  along  the  grain  boundaries was not  always related to  intergranular corrosion. This  precipitate-free zone is  also  present in  the  over-aged alloy. But the  over-aged alloy  will  suffer corrosion not only  in  the  grain  boundaries but  also  in  the  grain bodies  (Fig. 11).  Besides, the  increase in  the  anodic  area, and the consequent  reduction in the cathodic  area,  will  favo~ generalized corrosion rather than  intergranular attack.

TABLE I.  TYPE OF  ATTACK OF  AGED AI-4°oCu IN  IM DEAERATED NaCI SOLUTION

|                | Potential          | Potential                      | Potential         |
|----------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------|
| Heat treatment | Below --0'52V(nhe) | Between --0.52and --0'40V(nhe) | Over --0'40V(nhe) |
| Solubilized    | Passive            | Passive                        | Pitting           |
| Aged           | Passive            | Intergranular                  | Generalized*      |
| Over-aged      | Passive            | Pitting                        | Pitting           |

Table I summarizes the  behaviour  of  AI-4%Cu  alloys with different heat  treatments at  various  potentials in  deaerated  IM  NaC1  solutions. No  attack  is  observed for  any heat  treatment at  potentials below --  0.52  V(nhe).  Such a behaviour  could not be  predicted  from  the mechanism  of anodic and  cathodic  zones. Between --  0.52  V(nhe) and --  0.40  V(nhe) the  behaviour  of  all  heat  treatments is  the  same as  that expected  from the  original anodic-zone mechanism,  and above --  0.40  V(nhe) a behaviour  not  predicted by that  mechanism is  again  found.

From a practical point  of  view,  the  low potentials are  obtained when working  in pure  CI-  solutions in  the  absence  of  02.  The second  range  of  potentials is  obtained in O2-saturated solutions, and in  order to  reach the  highest range  of  ~aotentials either a stronger oxidizer or  an  external current will be  required.

## Cathodic  polarization curves

It is known in  practice that 02  plays an  important role in  the intergranular corrosion of  AI-Cu alloys. 22  For  this reason  the  cathodic polarization curves  in  air-saturated IM NaCI were determined for  pure  AI,  solubilized A1-4%Cu  and A12Cu (Fig.  12). It  was found that, as already mentioned  by Ketcham and Haynie, 7  the  cathodic reaction is  kinetically easier in  the  Cu-rich phases  than  in  pure  AI,  which  is  decisive in  the  behaviour of  AI  alloys in  C1-  solutions, as  discussed later.

## Intergranular corrosion in  absence  of C1-

To determine the  possibility of  pitting in  media  other than  CI-  solutions, polarization  curves  were obtained for  99.99%A1  and for  solubilized A1-4%Cu in  various solutions. From what had been observed  in  C1- solutions, pure  A1 was expected to behave  in the  same way as  the  depleted zone  of  grain  boundaries, and the  solubilized alloy was used  to  simulate the  behaviour of  the  grain bodies (Table  2). In  1M  NalOs, Na2SO4, H2SO4, and  ammonium  tartrate no pitting was observed  up to  +  3  V(nhe), the  highest potential used  in the  present work.  Furthermore, no  intergranular corrosion was detected in  aged  AI-4%Cu  when polarized in  those  solutions at  +  3  V(nhe).  A similar behaviour is to  be  expected in  all other solutions that produce  compact  anodic oxide  films on AI.  On the  other hand  pitting was observed in  Br-,  I-, CIO~, and  NO~ solutions. In  the  first  hree solutions, as  in  the  case  of  CI-  solutions, a difference of 130 to  200  mV was observed  between  the  pitting potentials of  pure  A1  and of  the

-4

I~G. 12. Cathodic  polarization curves  in  air-saturated IM NaCI  solution of pure aluminium,  solubilized A1--4%Cu, and intermetallic AI2Cu.

<!-- image -->

TABLE 2. RELATION BETWEEN PITTING POTENTIALS AND INTERGRANULAR CORROSION IN SOLUTIONS OTHER THAN NaCI

Intergranular

0.40)

0.23)

0.14)

| Electrolyte          | Pitting potentials V(nhe)   | Pitting potentials V(nhe)   | Intergranular corrosion*   |
|----------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------|
|                      | 99"99%A1                    | AI-4%Cu (solub.)            | AI--4%Cu (aged)            |
| IM KBr               | --0.42                      | --0.28                      | Yes (--0.40)               |
| IM KI                | --0.26                      | --0.13                      | Yes (--0.23)               |
| 1M NaCIO,            | --0.17                      | q-0.03                      | Yes (--0.14)               |
| IM NaNOs             | + 1.80                      | + 1.85                      | No (+ 1.85)                |
| 1M Na~SO,            | > + 3.0                     | > + 3.0                     | No (+ 3.0)                 |
| 1M HsSO~             | > + 3'0                     | > + 3'0                     | No (+ 3.0)                 |
| 0"IM NalOs           | > + 3.0                     | > + 3.0                     | No (+ 3.0)                 |
| IM Ammonium tartrate | >+ 3"0                      | >+ 3"0                      | No(+ 3.0)                  |

solubilized AI--4%Cu. When  the aged AI-4%Cu  alloy  was exposed to a potential between both pitting potentials intergranular corrosion was detected.

As mentioned  above  pitting of  pure  AI and of  solubilized AI--4%Cu was observed in  NO~ solutions. No  intergranular corrosion of  the  aged A1-4%Cu was detected. Aged AI-Cu showed pitting along  the  grain boundaries  (Fig.  13),  and the  reason  for this  difference in  behaviour  could  lie in  the  differences in  pitting morphology) s  The pits in  AI  in  NO~  solutions are  hemispherical, while  in  the  othel media  they  were found to be tunnel-like. It  seems that  in nitrate solutions corrosion  starts in the grain boundaries, but  cannot  spread  along  the  narrow depleted zone as  it  occurs  in  CIOi and in  halide solutions.

Ro. 14. Simplified potential--concentration diagram showing the type  of  attack suffered by  aged  AI-4%Cu.

<!-- image -->

## DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The present results  how that intergranular corrosion of  aged  AI--4%Cu  occurs only  in  a  narrow  range  of  potentials. Figure  14  summarizes the  results obtained with aged  AI--4%Cu, showing  the  type  of  attack expected  at  different potentials and  elconcentrations. Ifthe  metal is maintained in  the passive metal region, no  intergranular corrosion will  occur  and the  metal  will  be cathodically protected, although  its potential will be more positive than  the  potential of  immunity  in  the  potential-pH diagram  for AI-H~O. From the  old  mechanism  of  intergranular corrosion by  anodic and  cathodic zones  no  protection would  be  expected at  potentials higher than  about --  2.0  V(nhe). ~4 Nevertheless, it  was found  in  the  present work that intergranular corrosion does  not  occur if the metal is kept in the range  -0.4  V(nhe)  to --  0.5 V(nhe), depending  on the  CI-  concentration of  the  media.  These  results apply  only  to  pure NaCl or  KCI solutions. If other anions are  present in  the  solution the  zones in  Fig. 14 should  be displaced to  higher potentials, this displacement should  be  equal to  that caused  to  pitting potentials by  the  same anions. =3

The behaviour of  AI-Cu alloys in  natural environments can  be  explained by the use  of  the  anodic  and cathodic polarization curves  previously described. Figure  15 shows  schematically the anodic and  cathodic polarization curves for the Al-Cu  system in  chloride solutions. AI  is the  anodic  polalization curve for pure  AI  and  AI-0.2%Cu, A= is the  anodic polarization curve  for solubilized Al--4%Cu and  for Al=Cu,  (71  is the cathodic polarization curve for the AI-Cu  alloy in  the absence  of O=,  C~  is the  cathodic polarization curve  for pure  AI  and  for AI-0.2%Cu in  the presence of  O,  and  (73  is the cathodic polarization curve  for  the  Cu-rich phases  in  the  presence  of  O2. In  the absence  of 02,  the  corrosion potential of  the  aged  Al--4%Cu alloy will be  El, and  the

FIG, 15.  Current-potential relations for AI  and AI--Cu  in  chloride solutions. A1:  anodic polarization orAl  and AI-0.2%Cu; A=:  anodic  polarization of  solubilized AI-4%Cu  and of  AlaCu; C1:  cathodic  polarization of  solubilized AI-4%Cu  in  absence of  oxygen;  C,: cathodic polarization of pure aluminium in air  saturated solutions; Ca: cathodic polarization of  solubilized AI-4%Cu  in  air saturated  solution; El:  corrosion potential of AI-Cu in  deaerated solution; Ea: corrosion  potential of  aged AI-Cu in  air  saturated solution; i~:  limiting current  for  the  cathodic  reaction, and dissolution current  of  the grain  boundaries  of  the  aged AI-Cu alloy.

<!-- image -->

alloy will remain  passive. If O~ is  allowed  into the  system, the  corrosion potential will develop  to  E  2,  a little higher  than EpI. Under these  conditions the  Cu-rich phase  will remain  passive  and the  Cu-depleted  zone will  corrode. The rate  of  corrosion of  the Cu-depleted zone will  be equal  to  the  limiting current of  the  cathodic reaction of  O~ reduction. Hence the  higher the  O2 content, or  the  higher the  cathodic area, the  higher the  corrosion rate  of  the  grain  boundaries. This  explains the  influence of  the  cathodic area  on intergranular corrosion found by Coiner  and Francis. 5 As for  pure Al,  the corrosion potential will  be given  by the  intersection of  Ax  and C2, but due to the "slowness" of  the  cathodic reaction on  pure  A1 the  metal  will not  show much corrosion.

Summing  up,  the  results of  the  present work show that  intergranular corrosion of A1-Cu  alloys is  not  due to  a difference in  potentials between grain  boundaries  and grain  bodies,  but  to a difference in  the  breakdown potentials of  those  phases. The mechanism of  intergranular corrosion of  A1-Cu is  found  to  be of  the  same nature  as the  process  of  pitting of  A1. It  is  concluded  that  intergranular corrosion of  Al-Cu will  occur  only  under  the  following conditions:

1.  The alloy must have  a solute-depleted zone  along  the  grain  boundaries.
2. The corrosive medium  should  contain  anions  capable  of breaking  down  the passivity of  the  Al.
3. The breakdown potential of  the  depleted zone must be lower  than  that  of  the grain  bodies.
4. The corrosion potential of  the  alloy must be  over  the  breakdown  potential of  the depleted zone,  and under  the  breakdown potential of  the  grain  bodies.

When  the  pitting potential is  too  high,  as  in  the  case  of  nitrate solutions, other factors, like  the  morphology of  pitting, could  be important and are  being  studied  at present.

Acknowledgements--We thank  the  Programa  Multinacional de Metalurgia  (Programa  Regional  de Desarrollo Cientifico y  T6cnico--O.A.S.) and the  Consejo  Nacional de  Investigaciones Cientificas y Te6cnicas of  Argentina for partial financial support.

## REFERENCES

1.  U.  R.  EVANS, The Corrosion and Oxidation of  Metals, p.  670.  Arnold, London (1960).
2.  H.  K.  FARMERY and U.  R. EVANS, J.  Inst. Metals 84,  413  (1955-56).
3.  G. V.  AIOMOV, Thdories et  MPthodes d'Essai de la  Corrosion  des  Mdtaux, p.  291. Dunod, Paris (1957).
4.  R.  B.  MEARS,  R.  H.  BROWN and  E.  H.  D~x, Symposhtm on Stress-Corrosion Crackh~g of  Metals, Philadelphia 1944, p.  323.  ASTM-AIME (1945).
5.  W. H.  COLNER and  H. R.  FRANCIS, J.  electrochem. Soc. 105, 377  (1958).
6.  S.  J.  KETCHAM and W. BECK, Ist International Congress  on Metallic Corrosion, London 1961, p.  647. Butterworths, London (1962).
7.  S. J.  KETCHAM and F.  H.  HAYN~E, Corrosion 19,  242t  (1963).
8.  M. HANSEN, Constitution of  Binary  Alloys, p.  87.  McGraw  Hill, New York (1958).
9.  D.  GILRO't" and  J. E.  O. MAYNE, J.  appl.  Chem. 12,  382  (1962).
10. H. KAESCHE,  Z.  phys.  Chem. 34,  87  (1962).
11.  A.  P.  BOND, G.  F.  BOLTING, H.  A.  DOM~AN and  H.  BXLONI, J.  electrochem. Soc. 113, 773  (1966).
12.  JA.  M. KOLOTVR~IN, Corrosion 19,  261t  (1963).
13.  V.  HOSPADARU~: and  J. V.  PETROCELH, Y.  electrochem. Soc. 113, 878  (1966).
14.  J. HORVATH and  H.  H. UHUG, J.  electrochem  Soc. 115, 791 (1968).
15.  H.  B/SHNI  and  H.  H. UHLIG, J.  electrochem. Soc. 116,  906  (1969).
16.  H.  J. ENGELL  and  N.  D.  STOUCA, Arch.  EisenhiittWes. 30,  239  (1959).
17.  A.  I. AMMAR and  S.  DARWWSH, Electrochim. Acta 13,  781  (1968).

18.  T.  P.  HOAR  and W. R. JACOB, Nature, Lond. 216,  1299  (1967).
19.  F.  J. BURGER,  V. F.  TULL  and P.  H. HARMS, Bull. Inst. Metals 3,  6  (1955-57).
20.  C.  EDELEANU,  J. Inst. Metals 89,  90  (1960-61).
21.  C.  13.  DUNN and R.  B.  BOLON,  J. electrochem. Soc. 116,  1050 (1969).
22.  J.  D. 13ROGAN,  J. Inst. Metals 77,  133 (1946).
23.  S.  M. DE DE  M.ICHELI and J.  R. GALVELE,  in  preparation.
24.  M. POURBAIX, Atlas of  Electrochemical Equilibria, p.  171.  Pergamon Press, Oxford  (1966).