<!-- image -->

## PII:  30010-938X(96)000224

## THE EFFECT OF  PHASE COMPOSITIONS ON THE PITTING CORROSION OF  25 Cr DUPLEX STAINLESS STEEL IN CHLORIDE SOLUTIONS

L. F. GARFIAS-MESIAS,?' J.  M.  SYKESf* and C. D. S.  TUCKf t  Department of Materials, University of  Oxford,  Parks  Road,  Oxford  OX1 3PH,  U.K.

$  Langley  Alloys  Ltd, Alloys House,  Cordwallis  Park, Maidenhead SL6  7BU,  U.K.

Abstract-The effect of  annealing temperature on  pitting resistance of  25% Cr  duplex UNS S32550 was investigated.  CPT and  pitting  potential were  determined for this  alloy after  annealing  at 1020, 1060, 1100 and 1140°C.  The  higher  values of CPT and  pitting  potential were  found  after  annealing  at the lower  temperatures. Pitting  was  always  observed  preferentially in  the  ferrite phase. The  results can be partially explained by the  changes in  chemical  composition of ferrite and  austenite  phases. Copyright 0 1996 Elsevier  Science Ltd

Keyworalr: A. alloy,  A. stainless steel, C. pitting  corrosion.

## INTRODUCTION

The  development  of duplex  stainless steels (DSS)  has been  linked strongly  with the increasing  requirements of  the chemical industry for materials  resistance to highly aggressive environments. Duplex  stainless steels are  widely  used in  marine environments because  of  their good resistance to  pitting corrosion  and stress corrosion  cracking. The alloy content and the microstructure  are both important variables in  determining  the  pitting corrosion  resistance of the DSS.  In general, C, P,  S and non-metallic  inclusions have a negative effect on the  pitting resistance, whereas Cr,  MO, N, Si  and W  are  beneficial alloying elements against  pitting corrosion.  A  common way  to rank the  p$ting susceptibility in stainless steels is by the  use  of  the  pitting resistance number  (PREN).'Indeed,  this idea  has begun to  be  applied  to  duplex  steels in  recent  years.2T3 The PREN is linked  to  the  content  of three  most  important elements Cr, MO and N, each of them  weighted according to its influence on pitting:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Although this  is  a  considerable simplification of elemental influences  on  corrosion resistance, it has  been found to  be  extremely  useful as  an  index  of  likely alloy  performance purely  from the  alloy chemical  analysis.*

The  difficulty with duplex steels is  that  there  are  two  phases present  with different compositions, with the three key  elements partitioned  between  them  (chromium and

Manuscript received 11 September 1995.

*Corresponding author.

' Permanent address: CINVESTAV-Merida, A.P. 73,  Cordemex, CP  97310  M&amp;da YucatLn,  Mirxico.

molybdenum are  enhanced in  the  ferrite and  nitrogen is  enhanced in  the  austenite).  Thus, it is  clear3  that a PREN for each  phase  should  be calculated,  with the actual performance governed by  whichever phase  gives the lower  figure.  Bernhardsson3 has calculated from thermodynamic data how increasing the temperature at which  the alloy is  annealed  can change  the  compositions and  proportions  of  the  two phases. These  calculations show  that, whereas  the  PREN for  ferrite falls with temperature,  that  for  austenite  rises, so that  there  is an optimum annealing  temperature  where  the  two PREN curves cross.  If  PREN provides a reliable  measure of pitting resistance then  above  this  temperature pitting is  expected  to initiate in  the  ferrite phase and  the  alloy  resistance  falls as  the  PREN for  ferrite falls. Below the optimum temperature the PREN of ferrite is  improving, but the pitting  resistance  is limited  by the  austenite.  The  latter will  have a smaller PREN than ferrite, and  it will  further fall with decreasing  temperature.  Solomon and  Devine4  have  discussed how  changing  the proportions of the two  phases  influences pitting resistance through altering the phase compositions.

The  work described  in this  paper  examines the pitting  behaviour of UNS S32550  in chloride solutions,  in  order to  determine  how  changing  the  ferrite/austenite ratio  influences pitting  resistance  for  a particular  duplex  steel, to  find  the  optimum annealing  temperature for maximum pitting resistance and  whether  the site  of pitting switches from  ferrite to austenite  above the  optimum annealing temperature, as  predicted  by  the  theory  of Bernhardsson.

## EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

## Materials

Alloy  of the type  UNS S325.50 produced in a wrought form  were  annealed at four different  temperatures.  Table  1  shows  the  cast  composition of  the  alloy  used.  The  alloy  was solution treated  for  2  h using the following  temperatures:  1020, 1060, 1100 and  1140°C  to vary microstructure  (ferrite/austenite ratio)  and  then water quenched.  In order to  study the influence of the solution treatment  time  and  quenching method, the sample  annealed  at 1060°C  was  also  annealed  for  5  h followed by water or oil  quenching.

Samples  were supplied in  the  form  of  a  bar approximately 10  mm in  diameter. The  outer part  of  the  bar was  removed after  annealing  by machining to  produce  samples  in  the  form  of rods 8.5  mm in diameter. The  end  face of  each rod (the  surface to be tested)  was  carefully machined to  give  a  smooth finish  and  further  wet ground  to  4000 mesh  finish then degreased. A  few samples  were polished to 1  pm finish  before testing  for  metallographic  observations and microanalysis. The  chemical  composition of  the  different phases was detected  by using a Cameca SEMPROBE and  using  a current  of  10  PA at 20 keV.  Analysis  was  made at intervals  of  2  pm.

Table  1.  Cast composition of UNS S32550  alloy  used in  the  present work

| Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   | Composition (wt%)   |
|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Cr                  | Ni                  | MO                  | CU                  | N                   | Mn                  | Si                  | C                   | S                   | P                   |
| 25.92               | 5.9                 | 3.19                | 1.62                | 0.2                 | 0.96                | 0.47                | 0.03                | 0.007               | 0.024               |

## Critical pitting temperature determination

Critical pitting temperature  determination  (CPT) test was done using  a  method  similar to the zero resistance  amperometry (ZRA) test  as suggested by  Salinas-Bravo and Newman.' In  the  test, two similar duplex stainless teel samples  were connected through a sensitive micro-ammeter and  the potential  of one  recorded again a standard calomel electrode  (SCE)  connected via  a high impedance  buffer  amplifier. The  test solution  was 250  ml  of  10%  FeC&amp;  prepared  according  to  the  ASTM G 48  method  in  a  glass cell. To avoid crevices, the  cell was arranged so  that  both specimens  could be lowered  just  to  touch the liquid surface with  only  the  end face  wetted.  This  defined the  area  under test (no  attack  was ever  seen  on the  sides of  the  bar), whilst avoiding  any crevices. A potential output  from the ammeter  (1  PA - 10  mV)  was  used  to  record  the  current and the  temperature, measured with a  digital temperature  sensor  ic-LM35DZ (accurate to f 0.25'C)  calibrated within  the  range &amp;lOO'C,  and the  potential were logged  simultaneously on a  PC by  using a  16  bit ADC Card. In  each  test, the  CPT  was determined by coupling  a  sample annealed  at  1020°C (which  was found to have the  highest  pitting resistance) with the  test sample.  The  criterion used to determine the CPT of the samples was the temperature at  which the  current  measured increased to  a  value  of  5  PA. For this work, a  heating  rate of  0.5'C  min-'  was chosen.  This was sufficiently slow  to  obtain  an  accurate  CPT.

## Pitting  potential  determination

Potentiodynamic  sweeps in hot 3.5%  NaCl  solution  were carried  out at a rate  of 1  mV  s-i.  The  tests were carried  out  in  a  glass three-electrode cell held  in  a  water  bath  at 65°C.  In  all experiments  the  rod under test was supported  in  a  holder  on the  lid of  the  cell such  that  the  end face just  touched the  surface of  the  test solution as  described above.  The counter  electrode was a  platinum  wire, the  reference electrode a  saturated calomel  electrode (SCE)  at the  same  solution  temperature;  all  potentials are given against  the SCE.  The potential  at  which  the  current  density  exceeded 50  ~Acm-* was defined  as  the  pitting potential, Ep. After  testing, some samples  were  electrolytically etched  for  3  s in  40%  KOH at applied  voltage  of  2  V,  to  allow  the  ferrite and austenite to  be  distinguished in  the  optical microscope,  then  examined for  pits.

## EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The effect of  annealing  temperature on the  CPT  of  the  duplex steel is shown  in  Fig.  1. The plots  show  the  potential of  the  coupled electrodes against  the  SCE  and the  galvanic current  between  the two  electrodes  as a function of the temperature.  When samples annealed  at  1020°C were first coupled at  25°C the  galvanic current  observed  was very  low, less than 1  PA  and constant. Similarly, the  potential measured between the  galvanic couple and the  SCE  was constant  at  about  480  mV. As the  temperature  was raised, the  current  was stable until just below the  CPT  when some small  current activity (suggested to  be  metastable events') started to appear until finally the  current  steadily increased  when  stable pitting events  started. As current  transients begin, the  potential starts to  fluctuate downwards  until a  steady  decrease  occurs  simultaneously  with  the  increase in  the  galvanic  current  between the  samples. This  simultaneous  drop of  potential and increase in  couple  current indicates the onset  of  pitting and is  used to  define  the  CPT.  The CPT obtained  for  sample annealed  at 1020°C was 62.3'C.

The  initial potential  of coupled electrodes was changed  when  a sample annealed at

The  critical pitting  temperature  of alloy UNS S32550  annealed  at  temperatures  indicated. determined  by using the ZRA test. ( -) Potential  (mV(SCE) x 10);  (--)  current (PA)

<!-- image -->

1020°C was  coupled with samples annealed at  different temperatures, being 470, 460 and 425 mV (SCE)  for  samples  annealed  at 1060, 1100 and  114O'C, respectively.

As the  temperature  of  the  solution was increased,  the  potential  of  the  coupled  electrodes and  the galvanic current for the samples  annealed  at 1060, 1100 and  1140°C  followed  the same  behaviour  as described above  for  sample  1020°C. The  sample  annealed  at  the lowest temperature  (1020°C)  gives the highest CPT value, 62.3'C  with a value of 61.8'C  for the sample  annealed  40°C  higher,  at 1060°C.  On  increasing the  annealing  temperature  another 40°C a very  drastic decrease  in the CPT results,  to the value  of 54.1'C  for the sample annealed  at  1100°C. A  further  increase  in  the  annealing  temperature  (to  1140'(Z), results in  a greater  decrease in the CPT, to a value of  42.2'C. These  results  clearly  showed that  at  low

annealing  temperatures  (1020  and 1060°C)  the  influence of  the  annealing  temperature  on the CPT  is small. However,  at  higher  annealing  temperatures  (1100  and 114O'C), the  influence on the  CPT  of  the  alloy  is greater. Throughout, the  trend  is that  the  lower  CPT  corresponds with  increasing annealing  temperature.

The effect of  the  annealing  conditions  (time  and method  of  quenching)  was studied  by determining the  CPT for  the  alloy  annealed at 1060°C.  This alloy  was annealed for  5  h followed by water or oil  quenching (Fig.  2).  The  CPT for the  sample annealed for 5  h followed  by water  quenching showed  no difference with  the  value  obtained  for  the  sample annealed  during  2  h.  However,  in  the  case  of  the  oil-quenched  sample,  the  CPT  was 58.8'C, 3°C less than  the  water-quenched.

Potentiodynamic  curves  for  all samples  in  3.5%  NaCl  solution at  65°C are  shown  on Fig.  3.  This  temperature was chosen because  it lies above the  CPT  of  all the  samples.  The passive current  was less than  5  PA cm-* . The highest value  of  pitting potential was obtained for  the  sample annealed  at  1020°C (I$, = 322  mV (SCE));  annealing  at  1060°C gave  a  lower value (Ep = 255  mV), that  for  the  sample  annealed  at  1100°C  was even  lower  (Et, = 209  mV), and that  for  the  sample annealed  at 1140°C was lowest  of  all (E,  = 176  mV). Again,  pitting resistance falls with  increasing annealing  temperature.

When analysing  these  results, it  is  very important to know  the  phase where pitting corrosion  occurs.  Figures  4  and 5  show the  etched  surface of  the  samples  annealed  at  1020 and 114O'C,  after the  potentiodynamic sweep.  The austenite phase  is shown as  light grains

Fig. 2. The  critical pitting  temperature of alloy UNS S32550  annealed  at 1060°C  and  quenched under the  conditions indicated,  determined by using the  ZRA test. ( -) Potential (mV(SCE) x 10);  ()  current @A)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Anodic polarization  of alloy UNS S32550 in a 3.5% NaCI,  annealed  at temperatures indicated.  Test temperature  65'C, scan rate 1 mV SK'.

<!-- image -->

in  a  matrix  of  ferrite (dark  in  comparison).  The size of  both the  ferrite and austenite grains increases with  raising the  annealing  temperature  and the  proportion  of  ferrite increases from 47  to  64%.  It was found that  for  all the  samples  pitting was initiated in  the  ferrite or  at  the ferrite side  of  the  ferrite-austenite boundary.

Analyses  of  the  microstructure of  the  sample  annealed  at  1060°C  for  5  h  followed  by oil quenching showed  a  small  increase in  the  ferrite content  of  this sample compared  with  the water quenched. This small  increase in  the  volume  fraction of the  weakest phase,  could possibly account for  the  reduction  of  the  CPT  in  the  case  of  the  oil quenched sample.

Fig. 4. A  photomicrograph of sample  annealed  at 1020°C after  potentiodynamic test, showing attack on the ferrite matrix (dark phase).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. A  photomicrograph of sample  annealed  at 1140°C after  potentiodynamic test, showing attack on a localized  area in  the  ferrite matrix (dark phase).

<!-- image -->

Pitting in  the  ferrite phase is contrary  to  the  findings of  most of  previous  works already published,  where austenite was usually  attacked.496 In order  to  assess the  relative pitting resistance of  the  phases  their compositions  were determined.

The distribution of  the  alloying elements  in  samples  annealed  at  1020  and 1140°C are shown  in  Figs  6  and 7.  It  can be observed that  the  ferrite grains  are  larger than austenite grains  in  the  sample annealed  at  the  higher  temperature  ( &gt; 10  pm), whereas in  the  sample annealed  at  1020°C the  austenite grains are  just slightly larger than  the  ferrite. As expected,

i

<!-- image -->

M

Fig.  6. The  chemical  composition profile  for sample  annealed  2  h at 1020°C  followed  by water quenching.

go

Fig. 7. The  chemical  composition profile  for sample  annealed  2  h at 1140°C  followed  by water quenching.

<!-- image -->

the  composition profiles show that  the  ferrite grains are  enriched in  Cr  and MO  and depleted in  Ni and Cu. Similarly, in  the  austenite grains the  Ni and Cu are  enriched, whereas the  Cr and MO  signals are  lower.  All  elements  were evenly  distributed within  the  grains  and no segregation of  the  alloying elements  was noticed. The average  composition of  the  important elements  in  austenite and ferrite in  all four  samples  annealed  at  1020,  1060,  1100  and 1140°C are  shown in  Table 2  together with  the  average  bulk  composition of  the  alloy analysed. The levels of  N  presented  in  the  ferrite have been assumed to  be  around 0.05%  saturation with the  rest partitioned to  the  austenite.2

The first important  point  to  discuss is the  relative PREN value  of  the  two phases  in  each sample.  The PREN for  austenite in  sample  annealed  at  1020°C  (36.23) is lower  by  more than three  units than the  value  of  39.35  calculated for  the  ferrite, suggesting that  pitting should occur  only  in  austenite, but  experimental  results showed that pitting is confined  to  the  ferrite in  all samples.

The same is  true  for  samples annealed at  1060  and llOO'C,  where the  PREN for  the ferrite is  higher  than the  austenite by 2.3  and 0.5  units, respectively. Only in  the  sample annealed  at  1140°C is the  PREN of  the  austenite higher  than  in  the  ferrite. As expected, the PREN for  the  ferrite phase decreases  as  both the  annealing  temperature and the  ferrite content  increases, whereas in  contrast, the  PREN of  austenite increases as  the  annealing temperature  increases.

Figure  8  also  shows the  plots of  the  PREN calculated by using  the  average  composition of  the  alloy  (calculated from the  analyses  shown  in  Table 2)  and the  partition coefficients suggested  by Charles2  compared  with  the  real values  calculated directly from the  analyses. The calculated values  for  ferrite and the  real values  obtained  show good agreement at  low and  high annealing temperatures.  The  austenite  lines  shows  good  agreement  at low temperatures, but some  deviations  at higher temperatures.  The  discrepancy at high temperatures arises because the partition coefficients of Cr and MO were found  to be sensitive to  higher  annealing  temperatures. At lower  annealing  temperatures, the  partition coefficients are  less affected by temperature  and are  closer to  those  results reported  before.

Table  2. Average composition of ferrite and  austenite  phases and  bulk

| Composition in wt%    | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   | Composition in wt%   |
|-----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Annealing temperature | Phase                | %                    | Cr                   | Ni                   | MO                   | N'                   | Cu                   | S                    | P                    | PRENb                |
| 1020°C                | Ferrite              | 47                   | 26.36                | 4.63                 | 3.70                 | 0.05                 | 1.27                 | 0.073                | 0.043                | 39.35                |
|                       | Austenite            | 53                   | 23.14                | 7.36                 | 2.35                 | 0.33                 | 1.95                 | 0.035                | 0.025                | 36.23                |
| 1060°C                | Ferrite              | 51                   | 26.39                | 4.69                 | 3.57                 | 0.05                 | 1.31                 | 0.085                | 0.046                | 38.96                |
|                       | Austenite            | 49                   | 23.26                | 7.24                 | 2.33                 | 0.36                 | 1.85                 | 0.037                | 0.027                | 36.64                |
| 1100°C                | Ferrite              | 60                   | 26.39                | 4.83                 | 3.38                 | 0.05                 | 1.34                 | 0.074                | 0.042                | 38.34                |
|                       | Austenite            | 40                   | 23.44                | 7.15                 | 2.30                 | 0.43                 | 1.84                 | 0.042                | 0.022                | 37.82                |
| 1140°C                | Ferrite              | 64                   | 26.37                | 5.05                 | 3.36                 | 0.05                 | 1.36                 | 0.082                | 0.038                | 38.26                |
|                       | Austenite            | 36                   | 24.04                | 7.15                 | 2.33                 | 0.47                 | 1.83                 | 0.037                | 0.027                | 39.19                |
| Average               | Both phases          |                      | 25.06                | 5.89                 | 2.97                 | 0.20                 | 1.57                 | 0.060                | 0.035                | 38.06                |

<!-- image -->

Ferrite

Fraction

Fig. 8. Calculated  PREN values,  using equation  (l), for  austenite  and  ferrite from  theoretical  and experimental  values of Cr and  MO content.

It has  been  clearly shown that the pitting resistance of this duplex  stainless  steel decreases  as  the  annealing  temperature  is increased consistent  with the  decreasing PREN for ferrite; this  can  be associated with the lower levels  of the important  alloying elements  MO and Cr which  partition  preferentially  to  the  ferrite, but are  diluted  as  the  total  concentration of  ferrite increases.

The  important  question  is  whether  pitting  occurs in ferrite because  austenite  has higher pitting  resistance  than predicted,  or because  that  for  ferrite is  lower.

The  difference  in relative  resistance  of ferrite and  austenite might  be influenced by the presence of  high levels  of  Cu  in  the  austenite  (Table 2)  which  has been shown to  enhance  the pitting resistance of austenitic and  duplex  stainless  steels.7p9 Cu has  been  suggested  to improve  the  pitting  resistance  of  DSS in  acid  environments,'  and the  combination of  Cu  and N is believed  to  enhance corrosion resistance.8 Further work is in  hand to  assess experimentally  the effect of Cu  in the pitting  resistance  of these steels. On  the other hand, the high levels  of sulphur  in the ferrite, which  are more  than double  that  in the austenite, probably reduces  the pitting resistance of the ferrite  phase.  Similarly, the presence  of phosphorus,  which  also  has been  suggested to  have detrimental effects on the performance of  these  alloys, lo  is higher in  the  ferrite than in  the  austenite.  Therefore, pitting  susceptibility of  the  ferrite phase may  be reduced, relative to  the  austenite.  Certainly,  a  weighting  factor  of - 123  applied  to phosphorus and sulphur  in PREN calculations,'  could  account for preferential  pitting  of ferrite, but would imply  poor  performance rather than  high pitting resistance, as  shown here.

A  full explanation  of  this  behaviour  may also  require  consideration  of  synergy  between elements, rather than considering  single  elements  in isolation.  One  weakness of  the  PREN

approach is  that  it fails to  take  such  effects into  account.  Lu et  al.' have shown  a strong synergism  between molybdenum and nitrogen  in  austenitic stainless teel. In  these  duplex steels molybdenum levels are  highest in  the  ferrite, but  nitrogen  levels are  much  lower  than in  austenite. These enhanced levels of  nitrogen  could  increase the  potency of  molybdenum such  that  a  lower level of  molybdenum actually has  greater pit  inhibiting power  than the higher  molybdenum content  in  the  ferrite. Further  work is needed to  establish whether this synergism  alone  can account for  the  improved pitting resistance of  the  austenite phase.

## CONCLUSION

1.  The  pitting potential  and CPT of UNS S32550 duplex stainless steel are strongly influenced by the  solution treatment  temperature. Raising  the  annealing temperature  lowers both parameters.  The  maximum CPT reached was 62°C  obtained by annealing  2  h at 1020°C followed  by water  quenching.
2.  Pitting corrosion  of  UNS S32550 in  chloride solutions takes  place  preferentially in  the ferrite phase rather  than  in  the  austenite phase.
3.  High annealing  temperatures  (above 1060°C)  increase the  ferrite content  and dilute the  key alloying elements  in  the  ferrite lowering  the  corrosion  resistance of  the  ferrite.
4. PREN calculated  from  bulk composition is  unlikely  to  be a good  guide to assess pitting resistance of  duplex  stainless teels; a  better understanding  can  be  achieved  through calculating PREN values  for  the  two phases.
5.  At low annealing  temperatures, the  partition coefficients of  the  alloying elements  are in good  agreement  with those reported before.*  Some deviation  from  these  values  is observed  at  higher  annealing  temperatures  (higher ferrite contents).
6.  PREN values  for  austenite and ferrite calculated from  bulk analysis using  known partition coefficients can  provide  a  useful first approximation in  assessing pitting resistance.
7.  Additional factors  beyond  the concentration  of Cr, MO and N  may  need to be considered  to  fully understand the  relative pitting resistances of  austenite and ferrite. These could  include  levels of  other  beneficial elements  such  as  copper,  levels of  harmful elements such as sulphur or phosphorus  and  synergism between elements such as nitrogen  and molybdenum.
8. Acknowledgements-The authors  would like  to thank  Langley  Alloys  Ltd  for funding, provision of samples  and permission  to  publish this  research and  Professor D. G. Pettifor for  the  provision of  the  laboratory  facilities. One  of the  authors, L. F.  Garfias-Mesias would  like  to  thank  the  Consejo  National  de Ciencia y Tecnologia  (CONACyT, Mexico)  for  the  financial  support. We would  like  to  acknowledge Dr 0. Khaselev  for  useful  discussions and  Mr  C. Salter  for  analyses of  the samples  in  the  Cameca SEMPROBE.

## REFERENCES

1. K. Lorenz  and  G. Medawar, Thyssen Forsch. I,97 (1969).
2. J.  Charles, Proc. Duplex  Stainless  Steel  Conj, Beaune France,  p. 3 (1991).
3. S. Bernhardsson, Proc. Duplex  Stainless  Steel  Conf., Beaune,  France, p. 185 (1991).
4. H.  D.  Solomon and  T. M.  Devine, Duplex  Stainless  Steels (ed.  R. A.  Lula), p. 693. American Society for Metals  (1983).
5. V. M.  Salinas-Bravo and  R. C. Newman, Corros. Sci.  36,  67 (1994).
6. J.  0. Nilsson  and  A. Wilson, Mater.  Sci.  Technol. 9,  545 (1993).
7. P. Guha and  C. A.  Clark, Duplex  Stainless  Steels (ed. R. A.  Lula), p. 355. American Society for Metals (1983).

8. P. Combrade and  J.  -P.  Audouard, Proc.  Dup1e.x  Stainless Steel  Co@, Beaune,  France,  p. 251  (1991).
9. A. A. Hermas, K.  Ogura, S. Takagi and  T. Adachi, Corrosion 51, 3 (1995).
10. R. Dclling, V. Neubert  and  P. Knoll, Proc.  Duplex  Stainless Steel  Con/, Beaune,  France,  p. 1341 (1991).
11. Y.  C. Lu, M.  B. Ives  and  C. R. Clayton,  Corros. Sci. 35, 89 (1993).