## On  the Correspondence between  Electrochemical and  Chemical Accelerated  Pitting Corrosion Tests

B. E.  Wilde*  and  E.  Williams

Applied  Research  Laboratory, United  States Steel  Corporation, Monroeville, Pennsylvania

## ABSTRACT

For some years  now, many  workers  have been active in  the development of  a stainless steel that  is  resistant to pitting  and crevice corrosion in  halide media.  Electrochemical techniques combined  with  statistical multiple-regression  analysis  have beeen used to derive  a relationship between pitting susceptibility and chemical  composition. Recent publications in the literature have suggested, however, that  the use of electrochemical accelerated tests for  pitting corrosion studies leads  to erroneous  conclusions about  the  pitting susceptibility of alloys. This paper describes the results of a program designed  to investigate the above reports and firmly  establish whether indeed electrochemical techniques can be used as valid  accelerated tests in  pittingcorrosion studies.

Extensive  experimental investigation in 1M  sodium chloride on Type 430 stainless  teel have shown  an excellent correlation between electrochemical and chemical  techniques,  both  in visually observed  pitting susceptibility and metal  weight loss  data.  Further, data obtained  in 1M  sodium chloride containing different dissolved gases  have indicated why  other  authors  failed to obtain  any correspondence between electrochemical and chemical  accelerated pitting tests. Values  of the  critical breakdown potential were found  to vary from --0.035  VscE  to --0.185 Vsce for  the  same  steel in 1M  NaC1  saturated with  oxygen  and  hydrogen, respectively.

Controlled  potential chemical  tests have shown, that  although  pitting can occur at potentials active  to the breakdown potential, the corrosion potential in  a given  redox system  rises to values  more noble  than  this  latter potential, as a necessary prerequisite for  pit initiation.

Electrochemical techniques have been used extensively  in  the study of passivity breakdown and the development  of alloys  resistant to pitting corrosion. Brennert  (1), Mahla and Nielson  (2),  and Kolotyrkin (3)  have  employed  measurements of  the  "critical breakdown potential for  passivity," Ec,  to predict  the resistance of  alloys  to pitting corrosion  in halide media. Streicher  (4) has  successfully employed  an electrolytic test  to assess  the pitting resistance of a number of alloys to  chloride containing environments. The  unique  feature in these  techniques is  that  they greatly accelerate the corrosion process,  and thereby greatly facilitate laboratory studies  (5-13). We  have used the breakdown technique in  our  laboratory as a screening tool  in  alloy  development  programs,  on the premise  that, if  we  can raise Er  (by alloy  chemistry changes)  to potentials more noble  than  the corrosion potential of  the  alloy in  the  intended environment, we would get  no pitting.

Recently,  however, articles have  appeared in  the literature in  which  the validity of  using Ec as  an  index of pitting corrosion  in the  above  manner, has been questioned. France and  Greene  (14) report  a  lack of correlation between electrochemical and chemical exposure  tests on AISI Type  430  stainless steel  and zirconium  in  halide media. These authors  argue that an electrostatic build-up  of aggressive chloride  ions

9 Electrochemical Society  Active  Member.

at the metal interface occurs  during  electrochemical polarization, which  does not necessarily occur at a freely  corroding  interface thereby  leading  to differing behavior. Steigerwald  (15) has reported  that although  Ec relates to  pitting performance  in  some manner,  he has observed  pitting to  propagate at  potentials active to Ec,  for  Fe/Cr alloys in acidified FeCI~.

In view of the  apparent  conflict between the above reports  and numerous laboratory tests, we  undertook a  study to demonstrate  the correspondence  between accelerated electrochemical and chemical  pitting tests, no attempt  being  made to extend  this  correspondence to  long  term corrosion behavior. This  paper  describes the  results of  this study  and an attempt  to  explain the discrepancies noted  above.

## Materials and  Experimental  Work

Effort was made  as far  as possible to duplicate the conditions reported  by France  and Greene (14) to be certain  that the experimental technique  was not a variable. Cylindrical electrodes of AISI 430  and 304 stainless steel were machined (0.25  in. diameter by 0.75 in. long)  from  solution-annealed stock  having  the  composition shown in  Table  I.  The electrodes were abraded through  2.0 emery paper,  washed  in  detergent, rinsed in  distilled water,  and dried. Polarization experiments were conducted  in a glass  cell  with bright-platinum

Table I. Chemlcal compositions of  steels used in  this study Composition, w/o

| Designation                 |     C |   Si |   Mn |     P |     S |    Cr |    Ni | Cu   |    Mo | W   |
|-----------------------------|-------|------|------|-------|-------|-------|-------|------|-------|-----|
| AISI Type 430 stainlessteel | 0.094 | 0.32 | 0.56 | 0.026 | 0.01  | 16.35 |  0.17 | 0.08 |  0.02 | ND  |
| AISI Type 304 stainlessteel | 0.079 | 0.56 | 1.33 | 0.027 | 0.034 | 16.1  |  8.22 | 0.22 |  0.35 | ND  |
| AISI Type 310 stainlessteel | 0.08  | 0.4  | 1.7  | 0.036 | 0.018 | 17.2  | 11    | 0.2  |  2.2  | ND  |
| Carpenter 20 Cb3            | 0.027 | 0.39 | 0.37 | 0.016 | 0.004 | 20.56 | 33.71 | 3.36 |  2.24 | ND  |
| Ineoloy825                  | 0.028 | 0.27 | 0.71 | 0.002 | 0.004 | 21.1  | 42.6  | 2.0  |  3.13 | ND  |
| HastelloyC                  | 0.06  | 0.73 | 0.67 | 0.007 | 0.005 | 15.44 | 56.27 | ND   | 13.6  | 5.2 |

ND = Not determined.

auxiliary electrodes. The specimens  were mounted on a Stern-Mackrides-type holder  (16).

The corrodent was reagent grade  1M  sodium  chloride, dissolved in distilled water (6.3  meg  ohm  cm-1),  to give  a final pH  of 6.3 at  25~ Tests  were  conducted under  thermostatic control at  25  ~  ~\_ I~ All  potentials were measured with reference to a saturated calomel electrode connected  to the  cell  with a Luggin Haber probe.  No  effort was made  to correct for  liquid junction  potentials. Polarization measurements  were conducted potentiodynamically by  using  equipment and procedures  described  elsewhere (17,  18)  at a  sweep rate  of  0.600  V/hr similar to  the  traverse rate  used  by France  and Greene in  their step  technique. The  continuous scan  procedure  was adopted  in the  interests of better reproducibility (18).

Accelerated chemical  exposure tests were conducted in: (a) 1M  sodium  chloride solution containing 178 g/l  Kffe(CN)~ and 2.23  g/l K3Fe(CN)~  to  give  a final corrosion potential at  --0.100 VscE on a Type 430 stainless  steel electrode, (b) the standard  "ferric chloride test"  (19), that  is, 108 g/1  FeC13   9 6H20, with the  pH adjusted to  0.9  with  HC1.

All solutions, unless  otherwise  stated, were  saturated  with hydrogen  gas at  a flow rate  of 1.5  1/min, giving  a dissolved oxygen content  of 0.076 ppm.

## Results  and  Discussion

Polarization measurements  and environmental variables.--Potentiodynamic anodic  polarization curves  for the  two steels in  hydrogen  saturated 1M  sodium chloride are shown in  Fig. 1.  The electrolyte volume  in  each test was regulated to  600 ml,  and  the  curves  were  constructed by exposing  the  specimen  to  the  corrodent for 60 rain, followed  by scanning in  the  noble  direction. In contrast to data reported  elsewhere (14) no  activepassive  transitions were observed,  and the corrosion potentials on  Type  430  stainless steel  were  slightly more  noble having a  value of  --0.492  VSCE.  Clear breakdown potentials were observed  however on  both steels, the  value  on Type 430 stainless steel coinciding closely with  that published previously (14),  (--0.185V). The value  of  Ec on Type 304 stainless steel was --0.050 VSCE.  Prolonged exposure to potentials more  noble than  Ec resulted  in severe  pitting corrosion, as shown in Fig.  2.  Although  not  shown  in  Fig.  2,  no evidence of  crevice corrosion was observed  on any sample,  and each polarization curve  was reproducible to ·  10 mV with  respect to  Ec on repeat  runs.

Fig. 2. Macrophotographs of  AISI Type 430  stainless steel samples  before  and  after polarization  at potentials noble  to Ec.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Potentiodynamic onodic-polarization curves  for steels exposed to oxygen-saturated IM  NaCI  sweep rate,  0.600 V/hr.

<!-- image -->

Since  previous  accelerated  chemical test  data  were obtained  using  oxygen as the oxidizer  (14),  anodic polarization curves  were obtained  for  the two  steels in  oxygen saturated 1M  sodium  chloride, at  a flow  rate of 1.5  1/min, to  see if  the  oxidizer affected the  passive state. Typical curves are  shown in  Fig.  3,  from which

Fig. 1.  Potentiodynamic anodic-polarization  curves for  steels exposed to  hydrogen-saturated 1M NaCI sweep rate, 0.600  V/hr.

<!-- image -->

it  is  clear  that  both steels evidenced  a  value  of Ec considerably more noble  than  that  recorded  in  hydrogen saturated solutions. It  is  interesting to note  that the  passive  current for  Type 430 stainless steel is  not significantly affected by the  presence of  oxygen in  the electrolyte, whereas that  for  Type 304  stainless  teel is  decreased. In view of the  influence of oxygen on Er  several other  gases  were used during  polarization to  see if any effect could  be noted. The results of  these experiments  have  been  reported  elsewhere  (20),  but are  briefly summarized in  TabIe II. It  is  evident from Table II, that  Ec varies  considerably with the nature of the  stirring as,  which we  treat as significant and not experimental artifacts in view of the stated  reproducibility of our curves. Since  nitrogen and argon are  nonionic and do not participate in any electrode process, we  do not  at  this  time  have  any explanation of the effect. We  might suggest  however, that  these gases  may be involved in  an adsorption process on the surface  and, in this  way, impede  the adsorption of chloride  ions that appears to be  necessary  for pit

Table  II. Variation in Ec with the nature of the dissolved gases  (20) in  1M  NaCI  at 25~

<!-- image -->

| Gas      | Type 430 stainlessteel   | Type 304 stainlessteer   |
|----------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Hydrogen | --0.185                  | --0.050                  |
| Nitrogen | --O.130                  | --0.020                  |
| Argon    | --0.100                  | 0.050                    |
| Oxygen   | --0.035                  | 0.065                    |

Fig. 4. Semischematic presentation of why  previous  authors (14) failed  to pit  AISI Type  430  stainless  steel in chemical pitting  tests with oxyge..

<!-- image -->

initiation (4,  21) to  a degree  varying  with the  nature of the gas.  The  important  fact, however, is that  Ec is  not a unique  function of alloy  composition  and is dependent  markedly  on environmental variables.

alloy was exposed  to  the  "standard ferric chloride test" (19),  for  periods  of 20  and 72  hr.  Sheet specimens, (0.060  x  1 x  3 in.) were exposed,  suspended  in the solution  by Teflon  tape  threaded through  a hole  in  the  top of the sample.  At the same time,  electrodes of each material  were immersed and the potential/time behavior  recorded. This  corrodent contains chloride ions at  a normality of 1.185  and is  therefore similar to  the 1M  sodium chloride used to  determine Ec,  except  that the  redox potential on bright platinum was 0.555  Vsc~ due to  the  presence of  trivalent iron. In this  solution, alloys whose corrosion potential went more noble  than the  breakdown potential should  evidence pit  initiation. Visual  inspection  after 20 and 72 hr indicated all  the alloys had  pitted except  Hastelloy C  as shown  in  Fig. 5.  The potential transients are  shown in  Fig. 6,  and  are characterized by a relatively rapid  (over  15 min) increase  in  Ecorr  to  values between  0.220  and 0.525  VSCE. On all samples except  Hastelloy C,  the  corrosion potential then  decreased in  an  oscillatory manner to  values often  much  more active than  Er  and in  certain cases to values  approaching  those  reported  by Steigerwald (15) on similar material, e.g., --0.150 VSCE  for  the 18 w/o Cr Type 304 stainless steel, and --0.300 VscE  for

To explore the  possible dynamic nature of  this effect a Type 430 stainless steel was  exposed  to  a solution of oxygen saturated  1M sodium chloride. The  steadystate  corrosion  potential, Ecorr, was --0.140  VSCE  in close  agreement  with  that observed  previously (14). Although  on the  basis of  Ec obtained  in hydrogenated solutions the sample  should  have pitted, no  pitting was observed  over  a period  of  100 hr.  The sample  was then  connected  to  a potentiostat, and the  applied  potential regulated at --0.140 VscE  for  a further 100 hr, over  which time no pitting was observed. At this point, without  interrupting the  applied potential, the  oxygen flow was  stopped  and replaced  by hydrogen at 1.50 l/rain, and after  16 hr pronounced pitting occurred with  a rapid  increase in  applied anodic  current. These data  clearly indicate the  protective influence of  oxygen with  regard to  passivity breakdown,  and also  that  this influence can be destroyed merely  by aspirating oxygen out of solution with hydrogen.  Further  they indicate the extreme  caution which must be exercised  when using breakdown  data to predict  pitting corrosion susceptibility.

Fig. 5. Photographs of  samples removed from  the  ferric chloride test indicating  complete  correlation  with predictions of pitting  susceptibility based on  Ee.

<!-- image -->

On the  basis of  the  above  data,  we can  satisfactorily explain the  reasons  why  France  and Greene (14) did not get any correspondence between electrochemical and chemical  accelerated pitting tests  for Type  430 stainless steel as  summarized  in Fig. 4.  It  will be shown in  a following section, that  when  controlled potential chemical  tests  are conducted  with an  oxidizer  that does not  interact with  the  passive film  on  the  sample, complete  agreement  between the tests is  obtained.

Accelerated  chemical exposure tests.~The breakdown  potentials of a series of alloys was determined, as previously described, in  nitrogen-saturated 1M  sodium chloride. The alloys  were so chosen as to have a wide  range of  values of  Ec,  as  shown in  Table  III. Each

Table  III. Experimental  data on alloys  used in chemical pitting tests  in  aqueous ferric  chloride

|                          | ~e (in 1M NaCl + N2) Vse~   | Corrosion potential during test Vsc~   | Corrosion potential during test Vsc~   |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Alloy designation        |                             | Maximum                                | Minimum                                |
| Type 430 stainless steel | --0.130                     | 0.230                                  | --0.310                                |
| Type 304 stainless steel | --0.020                     | 0.280                                  | --0.140                                |
| Type 316 stainless steel | 0.I00                       | 0.385                                  | 0.099                                  |
| Carpenter20 Cb           | 0.500                       | 0.520                                  | 0.120                                  |
| Incoloy825               | 0.525                       | 0.530                                  | 0.180                                  |
| Hastelloy C              | >0.900                      | 0.530                                  | 0.530                                  |

<!-- image -->

I

Fig. 6. Potential vs. time  behavior  of alloys  exposed  to acidified FeCI3 solution.

the  17 w/o Cr Type 430 stainless steel. It  is  clear from inspection of  Fig.  6 and Table  III, that  pitting did  indeed occur  at potentials more active than  Ec for  Types 304 and  439 stainless steel. However, it  should  be  noted that  at  small  times, all the  samples  except  Hastelloy C, exhibited corrosion potentials more  noble  than their respective Ec  and  would  therefore  be  expected to initiate pits. The initial passivation process, where the Ecorr  increases to values  close  to the solution redox potential, can be quite rapid as  shown in  the  next  sect'ion, where pit  initiation occurred  in  less than  60 sec after  immersion, followed  by propagation at  potentials more active than  Er thus, both  confirming and explaining  Steigerwald's finding.

To further emphasize  this point  that  Ec relates specifically to the pit  initiation process  and not to the propagation  process,  a  series  of controlled potential measurements were made. A  schematic  of a  typical "cyclic" polarization curve (22)  for  Type 430 stainless steel in  nitrogenated 3.5  w/o NaC1  is  shown in  Fig.  7, to indicate the  potential regions  where pits  once initiated, will propagate. Pits  were initiated anodically at potentiaIs noble  to  Er in area A, then the  applied potential was switched  to  those  shown in  areas  B  and C. It was  clear  that  propagation occurred  in area B, (i.e., active  to Er over a  period  of 100  hr, whereas no propagation was  noted  in area C. Pourbaix (22) has used  such plots to  develop  the  concept  of  the  "protection  potential Ep,"  which represents the  potential more active than  which pit  propagation cannot  be sustained and repassivation occurs.

From the  above data, two  significant factors emerge: (i)  that  there  is  complete  correspondence in predictions of pitting susceptibility between electrochemical polarization data and exposure data obtained  in  an accelerated chemical  test, and (ii)  that  although  pitting  corrosion can be sustained at  potentials active  to E~,  a necessary prerequisite in  this process  is  that  the corrosion potential of the sample at some time must become more noble  than  Ec to  initiate pits. This  latter process  can occur quite  rapidly  in solutions of oxidizers  and may  be missed if  a continuous  potential check  is  not  made, leading to  the  erroneous conclusion that  pitting corrosion can initiate at potentials active to  Er

Controlled potential chemical  pitting tests.~It was shown above that  oxygen stabilized the  passive state with  regard to  breakdown by chloride ions, e.g., values of  Ec obtained in  oxygenated  solutions were considerably  more noble  than  those  obtained  in hydrogenated solutions. On  this  basis  it is  understandable why  no correspondence was  obtained  between controlled potential pitting tests conducted  potentiostatically in H2

Fig. 7. Schematic  presentation of  data  to  support  the  argument that pit propagation can continue  at potentials more  active than Ec.

<!-- image -->

Table  IV.  Weight-loss data on AISI Type  439 stainless steel after  electrochemical  and  chemical  corrosion tests

|                                                                                                                | Type of test                                      | Type of test                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                | 1M NaCl Electrochemical + 1M NaC1 in H~,O +       | [Fe(CN}~] l- [Fe(CN)~]~-                        |
| Solutiontemperature Exposure time Specimen potential Corrosionrate ~mpy~ Initial pH Final pH Type of corrosion | 25* ~ I*C 24 hr --0.100 V~cE 96.4 6.3 5.3 PittLng | 25 ~ ~ I~ 24 hr --0.100Vsc~ 128 6.7 6.9 Pitting |

saturated solutions and with oxygen as the oxidizer (14) in  1M  sodium chloride solutions. To demonstrate further  the correspondence  between electrochemical and chemical  pitting tests, a Type 430 stainless  teel sample was exposed to a hydrogen  saturated solution of 1M  NaC1  containing K4Fe(CN)6  and K3Fe(CN)6  to give  a corrosion potential of --0.10O  Vsc~.  Selection of the  ferroand  ferricyanide salts for a redox  system  was made  on the premise that  being large  anions  they would be less likely than  oxygen to  be  involved in  adsorption processes  which stabilized the passive  state. Within  60 sec  after immersion,  pit  nuclei were clearly visible because  the Fe  2+  corrosion product  formed a patch  of  "Prussian blue"  at  the  pit site,  as reported by Stoffel et  al. (22).  Continued  exposure  resulted in  an oscillatory shift of  Ecorr  in  the  active direction as observed  in  the  FeC13 tests. Equivalent tests on the  same material,  conducted potentiostatically at --0.1 VscE  in hydrogen saturated 1M sodium chloride, resulted in distinct pit  nuclei  after  approximately 45 sec.  These tests were conducted  for  24 hr  and a comparison  made of  the  weight  loss  behavior  and general  appearance in both the electrochemical and chemical  test. These data are  shown in  Table  IV,  from which it  is  seen  that  excellent agreement  was observed  between  both  tests.

## Conclusions

Evidence  has  been  presented which demonstrates the complete  correspondence between  the  pitting corrosion behavior  of Type  430  stainless steel  in accelerated electrochemical and chemical  tests. On  the basis  of polarization measurements and  controlled  potential corrosion  studies, discrepancies previously  reported between the two  test  methods can be satisfactorily explained.

The specific relation of the critical breakdown potential to  pit  initiation and not  to  pit  propagation has been  demonstrated, along with confirmation of  the  previously reported fact that  pit  propagation may proceed at  potentials active to  the  breakdown potential.

It  has been shown  that  extreme caution  must be used  when utilizing Ec as  an  index of  pitting corrosion susceptibility, since  the  absolute magnitude  of  Ec has been demonstrated  to vary not only with the welldocumented  environmental and experimental variables, but  also  with  the  nature of  the  gases  dissolved in  the corrodent.

## Manuscript received Oct.  23,  1969.

Any  discussion of this  paper will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to  be published in  the  December  1970 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  S. Brennert, J. Iron Steel  Inst., 135, 101  (1937).
3.  Ya. M.  Kolotyrkin, Th/s Journal, 108,  209  (1961).
2.  E. M.  Mahla and N.  A.  Nielsen, Trans.  Electrochem. Soc., 89,  167 (1946).
4.  1VI. A.  Streicher, ibid., 103, 375  (1956).
6.  J.  Horvath  and H. H. Uhlig, This  Journal, 115,  791 (1968).
5.  W. Schwenk, Corrosion, 2(}, 129t  (1964).
7.  H.  P. Leckie and  H.  H. Uhlig, ibid., 113, 1262 (1966).

8.  V. Hospadaruk and J.  V. Petrocelli, ibid., 113,  878 (1966).
9.  M.  Pourbaix, L. Klimzack-Mathieiu, Ch. Mertens, J. Meunier, C1  Vanleugenhaghe,  L.  deMunck, L.  Laureys, L.  Neelemans,  and M.  Warzee, Corrosion  Sci., 3,  239 (1963).
10.  Ya. M.  Kolotyrkin, "First International Congress on  Metallic Corrosion," p.  10,  Butterworths, London (1962).
11.  Ya.  M. Kolotyrkin, Corrosion, 19,  261t  (1963).
12.  T. P.  Hoar, D.  C.  Mears,  and  G.  P. Rothwell, Corrosion Sci., 5, 279 (1965).
13.  D. E. Davies and M.  M. Lotlikar, Brit. Corros.  J., 1, 149  (1966).
15.  R.  F.  Steigerwald, ibid., 22,  107,  (1966).
16.  M.  Stern  and A. C. Makrides, This Journal, 107, 782 (1960).
17.  B.  E.  Wilde and N. D. Greene, Corrosion, 25,  300 (1969).
18.  W.  D. Henry and B. E.  Wilde, ibid., 25, 515 (1969).
19. H. A. Smith Meta~ Progr., 33, 596 (1938).
20.  B.  E. Wilde  and E.  Williams, This  Journal, 116,  1539 (1969).
21.  E.  Brauns  and W. Schwenk, Archiv. Eisenhuttenw., 32, 387  (1961).
22.  M.  Pourbaix, Private communication, CEBELCOR, Brussels, Belgium.
14.  W.  D. France  and N.  D. Greene, Corrosion, 26, 1 (1970).
23.  H. Stoffels and W.  Schwenk, Werkstof]e u.  Korrosion, 12, 493  (1961).

## Technical Notes

@

<!-- image -->

## Diffusion  Coefficients  in Propylene Carbonate,  Dimethyl Formamide, Acetonitrile, and  Methyl  Formate

J. M. Sullivan) D. C. Hanson,  and  R. Keller*

Rocketdyne, A Division of  North  American Rockwell  Corporation, Canoga Park,  Califor~lia

Diffusion coefficients in  aprotic solvents are  of  interest  for  estimates of  transport limitations in  nonaqueous lithium  batteries. Integral  diffusion  coefficients of LiC104 and some other  solutes were measured  in  four aprotic solvents, and viscosity data  were obtained.

The  solvents propylene  carbonate  (PC), dimethyl formamide (DMF),  and acetonitrile (AN)  were distilled, and were analyzed by a vapor  phase  chromatographic  technique  employing a  Porapak Q column. Solvent  batches  were  used that  contained  40 · 20 ppm  water and less  than 60 ppm  organic  impurities according  to this  analysis; impurity  contents  were somewhat  higher in  the  case  of  methyl  formate  (Mr), namely,  about  100 ppm  water  and 500 ppm  methanol.

High grade  commercial  products were analyzed  and used without  further purification as solutes, except for  vacuum drying  of  the  lithium compounds.  Lithium hexafluoroarsenate was supplied  in a methyl formate stock  solution by Honeywell's  Livingston  Electronic Laboratory, Montgomeryville, Pennsylvania.

where W(t) is  the  apparent  weight of the  suspended disk  at  time  t, and W (~o) the  weight  after equilibrium has  been  reached; a  is  an apparatus constant.

The recommended Micro-Porous  Filter Disks (2-in. diameter, 1/~-in. thick, porosity No. 10) were obtained from the Selas Corporation  of America. They  were evacuated, filled with the solution to be studied, and allowed  to soak overnight. Each  disk  was  suspended by a fine  wire  from the  arm of an analytical balance in  about 11/~  liters of pure solvent. The solvent  container was placed  in a constant temperature mineral oil  bath  maintained at  25.00 ~ \_ \_ \_   0.02~ A  flow of nitrogen  was swept over the solvent. An  aqueous 1.5M KC1  solution was  used for the determination of the flit constant a [in  accordance with  ref  (1), the  differential diffusion constant for  one-half of  the  initial KC1 concentration in  the frit was employed, i.e.,  D  = 1.87 x 10-5  cm  2  sec-1 at  25~

The  results  of  diffusion coefficient measurements are  given  in  Table  I;  the  estimated accuracy  is  1-2%.

Viscosities were determined  by a conventional technique  involving measurement  of  the  effiux time  of  the solutions through a  capillary. Results  are given in Table II.

There was  direct correlation between the diffusion coefficient and the  solvent viscosity. If  the  products of these  two values, D  x n(~obenr are  formed,  they  deviate not more  than --+16% from the average  for  the reported values  (the  consistency  is  significantly smaller  if  the  viscosity of the  solution rather  than  of

A method  that involves  determining  the weight change of a porous  disk  filled with  the  solution to  be tested  was  employed for measuring diffusion coefficients. This method is  described in detail in  ref.  (1) and was first used  by Schulze  (2). It  has  been  revived by Wall et al. who  studied its  application to measure diffusion coefficients for  aqueous electrolyte  solutions (3),  diffusion coefficients of polymers  in  aqueous environment  (4),  and in various  nonaqeuous  solutions (5). In  this present work,  the  method has  been  applied to  measure diffusion coefficients in aprotic electrolyte systems.

A  porous disk was  filled with the solution to be studied and suspended  in  a large  volume of  pure  solvent.  The apparent weight  is  measured as a function of time,  and an average  or integral diffusion coefficient, D, determined from equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

* Electrochemical Society  Active  Member.

Present address: Fundamental Research Branch, Tennessee leY Authority, Muscle  Shoals, Alabama.

Val-

Table  I. Diffusion coefficients in  aprotic  solvents  at  25~

| Electrolyte             | Diffusion coefficient. cm 2 sec-1   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| 1M LiC10~/PC            | 2.58 X 10 -e                        |
| 0.TM LiC1 + 1M A1CIa/PC | 3.04 10-8                           |
| 1M LiC10~/DMF           | 7.29 x 10-~                         |
| 1M LiCI/DMF             | 5.87 10-"                           |
| 1M LiCIO~/AN            | 1.71 X 10-~                         |
| IM LiCIOdMF             | 1.68 I0-5                           |
| I.IM LiAsFr             | 1.54 I0-~                           |