## The  Effect  of Nitrogen Additions Upon the Pitting Resistance of 18  Pct  Cr,  18  Pct  Mn Stainless  Steel

## A. G. HARTLINE, IT[

The effect of  nitrogen additions upon the  pitting resistance of  18 pct  Cr, 18 pct  Mn  stainless  steel has  been  investigated by potentiokinetic techniques in  a 1000 ppm  NaC1  solution. Nitrogen  additions increased the  pitting resistance of  the  steeI irrespective of  structure, however,  the  ferritic steel was less  pit  resistant than  the  (duplex) steels containing both austenite and ferrite which,  in  turn, were less  pit  resistant than  the  totally austenitic steels. For steels having  a duplex  structure, the  effect of  nitrogen on the  pitting resistance  was observed  to  follow  a linear function of  the  relative amount of  austenite in  these steels due to  the  area  effects of  the  austenite and  ferrite which are  galvanically coupled in  these  steels. The addition of  nitrogen was found  to  increase the  amount  of  austenite at a rate  of  approximately 200 times  the  percent nitrogen addition from 36 pct  austenite for the  0.02  pct  N  steel to 100 pct  for  the  0.40  pot  nitrogen steel. The addition of  nitrogen to the  totally austenitic steels increased the  pitting resistance at  the  rate  of  approximately 0.31  volts per  pct  nitrogen added,  but  no mechanism was found  for  the  increased resistance.

austenitic, Uhlig transformed the  alloy to  ferrite by lowering the  carbon  and  nitrogen contents and  then quenching from  elevated temperatures where  the  ferrltic phase  was stable. Uhlig found that the  change  in crystal structure did  not  appreciably change  the  pitting resistance and, in  fact, the  ferritic structure displayed minimally better pitting resistance than  the  commercia austenitic grade. Uhlig also added  0.24 pct  nitrogen to Type  304.  Tests in  ferric chloride Indicated that this addition increased the  pitting resistance of  Type  304 from  2  to  10  times when  compared  with the  commercial austenitic grade or  the  ferritic samples.

Nrr R O G E N bearing  stainless  teels have attracted recent  interest because  of  the  increasing cost  of  nickel, the  expanded  interest in  CrMn  steels, and  the  demands for  higher  strength austenitic stainless  teels. Nitrogen additions were made in  the  Cr(NI)Mn stainless steels to  augment  the  austenitizing power of  Mn. While the  p r i m a r y   interest in  the  development of  Cr(Ni)Mn stainless  teel was for  cost  reduction, sufficient nitrogen solubility existed in  these  steels to  take  advantage of  the  strengthening effect of  the  nitrogen addition. The development  of  the  Cr(Ni)Mn stainless  teel culminated in  a s e r i e s of  steels possessing similar corrosion resistance and equal  or greater strength than  the  AISI  300 series stainless steels. While  the  general austenitizing and strengthening effects of  N additions have  been  studied, the  effects of  N  upon  the  degree  of  austenite stabilization and  the  pitting resistance of  the  Cr(Ni)Mn steels have not  been  extensively studied.

Early  investigations 1-s  indicated that  nitrogen additions had little or no effect upon the  pitting resistance of  stable austenitic stainless steels; however,  these results were obtained from alloys having  such  low nitrogen  solubilities that the  effect of  nitrogen additions might  not  have  been  discernible. However, studies 4-8 of  less  stable alloys showed improvement  in  pitting resistance as the  result of  nitrogen additions. This  increased  pitting resistance was attributed to  the  e l i m i nation of  f e r r i t e (which  is  normally  detrimental to  the pitting resistance of  austenitic stainless  teels).

H. H. Uhlig 4  e x a m i n e d   the  effect of  crystal structure and  nitrogen additions to  the  18  Cr,  8  Ni (Type  304) stainless  teel, while  this grade  is  usually considered

A.  G.  HARTLINE,  III is Development Engineer, Allegheny Ludlum Steel Corporation, Bar  Products Division, Watervliet, N.  Y.  12189. This paper is based on  a  presentation made at a  symposium  on  "New Developments  in Ferritic and  Duplex  Stainless Steels," held at  the  Fall Meeting in Cleveland, Ohio, on  October  19,  1972, under the  sponsorship of the Corrosion Resistant Metals Committee  of TMS-!MD  and  the  Corrosion and  Oxidation Activity of  the ASM.

M. A.  Strelcher 9  also investigated the  effect of  nitrogen  and  other alloy additions to  Type  304  and  found that increasing the  molybdenum,  nitrogen and/or silicon contents and  reducing the  carbon  content increased the  pitting resistance of  this steel. This  investigation concluded that the  benefit of  nitrogen additions to  Type 304  was  through the  elimination of  the  ferrite produced by  the  addition of  molybdenum or  silicon from  the  microstructure. Thls  conclusion follows from  the  work of  Odar  and  Smith 1 0   where 18  Cr,  8  Ni  alloys containing austenite and  ferrite displayed inferior pitting resistance to  the  totally austenitic steel. Streicher found that Increased pitting resistance resulted from  the  addition of  nitrogen to  the  totally austenitic steels, but the  benefit was relatively small unless accompanied with the  addition of  molybdenum and/or silicon.

While  recent studies I~-~2 have  further indicated the benefit of  nitrogen additions to  the  Cr(Ni)Mn  family of stainless steels, the  exact effect of  nitrogen has  been partially masked  because of  changes in  alloy content, particularly additions of  chromium and  molybdenum. The conclusions are  also clouded because these studies like those above  appear partially contradictory. The lack of  information on  the  effect of  nitrogen upon the  pitting resistance of  the  Cr(Ni)Mn  stainless steels is of  particular concern  since they have  both significantly greater solubility for nitrogen than  the  Cr-Ni stainless steels and  the use  of  nitrogen is  more  prey-

alent in  these  alloy grades  than  for  the  Cr-Ni  stainless steels.

The corrosion resistance data  obtained by investigators  such  as Heger  Is  or  Nighawan et  al  ~4 have provided  a comparison between  the  corrosion resistant Cr(Ni)Mn stainless  teels and  the  Cr-Ni  stainless steels. These studies have shown that  the  Cr(Ni)Mn steels with  or  without  nitrogen have corrosion or pitting resistance  quivalent to  steels such  as AISI  304 or 316. The above investigations were encumbered  by large  changes  in  the  Cr,  Mn,  Mo, and Ni contents so that the  effect of  nitrogen upon the  pitting resistance of  Cr(Ni)Mn stainless  teels was not  discernible. The basic  Cr-Mn steels were chosen  for  investigation to eliminate the  effects of  additional elements  described above so  that the  independent effect of  nitrogen upon pitting resistance could  be examined.  The objective of  the  work described below was to  investigate the  effect  on  nitrogen upon  the  pitting resistance of  C r - M n stainless  teels and  to  develop  an  understanding of  the effect of  nitrogen additions upon  the  relative amount of  austenite in  these  steels.

This  study  was designed to  d e t e r m i n e the  effects of nitrogen additions upon the  pitting resistance and upon the  relative amounts  of  austenite and ferrite in  duplex, (austenite plus  ferrite) and  totally austenitic Cr-Mn stainless  teels. For the  purpose  of  this  study, duplex steels are  those  having  any mixture  of  both  austenite and  ferrite. The Cr-Mn steels were chosen  for  evaluation because  of  their high  solubility for  nitrogen and because  the  relative amounts  of  austenite and ferrite may be adjusted both  through  thermal  treatment and by the  addition of  nitrogen.

The 18  Cr, 18  M\_n composition was chosen  for  evaluation because  the  data  of  Koster TM indicated that  the nitrogen-free composition was duplex  when annealed at  1950~  (1070~ and could  be totally ferritized by annealing near  2300~  (1260~ The data  developed by Carney  ~6  indicated that  the  composition had a large solubility for  nitrogen and could  be totally austenitized through  this  addition. The composition, therefore, provided  the  two essential elements  required for  this  study: high  nitrogen solubility and  diversity of  crystal structure  and  phase  balance.

ferroalloys and electrolytic metals.  The series of compositions listed in  Table  I  were melted  in  a 20pound (9.2  kg)  air  induction furnace.  The C, Cr,  and Mn  were held  to  close  tolerances, the  Ni,  Cu, and Mo were held  to  residual levels, and the  nitrogen content was systematically increased using  nitrided Mn.  The nitrogen content was increased until ingot  porosity was observed  indicating that  the  alloy melt  was fully saturated  with  nitrogen. In  this manner,  the  complete  range of  nitrogen contents amenable  to  the  18 pct  Cr, 18 pct Mn  composition was studied. While  the  carbon  content systematically increased with  increasing nitrogen as the  result of  the  nitrided Mn  addition, it  was not  felt that  the  range  of  0.016  pct  carbon  would  bia~  the  data and was not  considered in  the  interpretation f  the  data.

The mechanical  processing of  the  ingots  consisted of: grinding the  ingots to  remove surface  imperfections, hot  rolling the  ingot~ at  2200~  (1205~ to  0.150-in. (3.8  mm)  thick sheet  followed by an air  anneal at  1950~ (1070~ for  15 min. The annealed sheet  was then  pickled  in  10 pct  HNO3:2 pct  HF  at  150~  to  remove the  hot rolling and annealing scale, cold  rolled 50 pot  to  0.075in.  (1.9  mm)  thickness, and  then  annealed at  1950~ (1070~ for  seven  minutes  in  air, and pickled as above to  r e m o v e  the  a n n e a l i n g scale.  Microscopic  examination  of  the  annealed  0.075-in. (1.9  mm)  strip indicated that  nitrogen adsorption during  the  1950~  (1070~ final anneal  had produced  an  austenitized zone approximately 0.001  in.  (0.025  mm)  thick at  the  surface which was removed by another  pickling treatment until a reduction in  thickness of  0.003  in.  (0.075  mm)  was obtained. A final heat  treatment of  2300~  (1260~ for  15 min.  followed  by a water  quench  was given  to  a sample  of  Alloy No. 1 to  ferritize the  duplex  structure, after which the sample  was again  pickled to  r e m o v e  the  scale  and austenitized zone. Samples of  the  steels were subsequently sheared  for  evaluation by potentiokinetic and X-ray  techniques.

Investigations x7,18 have indicated that  nitrogen additions provided  a gradual improvement  in  pitting resistance  and moreover  the  improvement  was more readily observed  in  the  more aggressive solutions than  in  solutions having  a low chloride concentration. To mimimize data  scatter encountered by immersion  testing and to allow  discrimination between relatively small  nitrogen increments, the  determination of  pitting resistance was performed  using  potentiokinetic techniques that  provided a variety of  pitting environments which become more severe  as  the  sample  becomes more anodic.  The determination of  amount Of austenite in  the  duplex  alloys was performed  by X-ray  techniques to  m i n i m i z e   error  and the  combination of  these  techniques provide  an  accurate analysis of  the  effects of  nitrogen upon the  pitting resistance  and relative amount of  austenite in  18  Cr, 18  Mn stainless  teel.

Determination of  the  pitting resistance of  the  ferritic, duplex,  and  austenitic steels was obtained by a standard method in  compliance  with  the  ASTM  recommended practice. Samples  for  potentiokinetic evaluation were obtained from the  processed  strip described above. Prior  to  testing, the  samples  were degreased  in  a hot (120~  (50~ concentrated solution of  Alconox  cleaner and  thoroughly rinsed in  water  and alcohol.

Potentiokinetic evaluation of  the  alloys was conducted in  a cell which has  been  described by M.  J.  Johnson TM which is  similar to  the  Stern-Makrides 2~  s a m p l e   h o l d e r specified in  the  ASTM recommended practice. The cell is  a  high  giass  cylinder having  a  flat ground  side  through which a hole  has  been  blown to  produce  tapered  sides

## METHODS AND PROCEDURE

The 18  Cr, 18  Mn, N  steels evaluated in  this  study were prepared  from commercial  grades  of  low carbon

| Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   | Table I.Composition of 18 pct Cr, 18 pet Mn Steels Evaluated   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Steel                                                          | C                                                              | Mn                                                             | P                                                              | S                                                              | Si                                                             | Cr Ni                                                          | Cu                                                             | N                                                              |                                                                |
| 1                                                              | 0.022                                                          | 18.25                                                          | 0.012                                                          | 0.011                                                          | 0.34                                                           | 17.95 0.07                                                     | 0.20                                                           | 0.03                                                           |                                                                |
| 2                                                              | 0.026                                                          | 18.20                                                          | 0.006                                                          | 0.014                                                          | 0.32                                                           | 17.88 0.07                                                     | 0.22                                                           |                                                                |                                                                |
| 3                                                              | 0.027                                                          | 18.14                                                          | 0.006                                                          | 0.017                                                          | 0.38                                                           | 17.88 0.07                                                     | 0.23                                                           | 0.18                                                           |                                                                |
| 4                                                              | 0.030                                                          | 18.20                                                          | 0.009                                                          | 0.010                                                          | 0.37                                                           | 17.88 0.08                                                     | 0.22                                                           | 0.33                                                           |                                                                |
| 5                                                              | 0.032                                                          | 18.00                                                          | 0.011                                                          | 0.009                                                          | 0.37                                                           | 18.10 0.08                                                     | 0.22                                                           |                                                                |                                                                |
| 6                                                              | 0.038                                                          | 17.80                                                          | 0.009                                                          | 0.012                                                          | 0.29                                                           | 17.83 0.08                                                     | 0.22                                                           | 0.52                                                           |                                                                |
| 7*                                                             | 0.037                                                          | 18.25                                                          | 0.008                                                          | 0.013                                                          | 0.40                                                           | 18.25 0.07                                                     | 0.24                                                           |                                                                |                                                                |

*Ingot porosity observed.

minimizing the  entrapment of  c o r r o s i o n products.  The sample  was attached to  the  cell by clamping  to  a flat Teflon  gasket  with  a 1/16  in.  (1.6  mm)  raised ring  seal around  a 1 cm ~  hole  in  the  cell. The platinum  counter electrode, KC1  salt bridge  and saturated Calomel  electrode  were of  standard design  with  the  capillary of  the salt bridge  located approximately 2 mm  from the  sample  surface. Electrical connection to  the  sample  was made externally to  the  cell. A Wenking potentiostat used  in  conjunction with  an X-Y recorder provided  a graphic  display of  the  anodic  polarization data.  The voltage  increase was obtained using  a motor drive  to produce  a 0.7  volt per  hour  scanning rate.

After  the  sample  was secured to  the  cell, internal electrical connection was established by adding  150 to 200 mt of  a solution of 1000 ppm  CI-  as NaCI. To avoid pH effects, the  pH was standardized at  5.0  through  the addition of  acetic acid.  After  the  external electrical connection was established, the  sample  was permitted to  r e m a i n   in  contact with  the  solution for  30 min.  at -0.3  to  - 0 . 1   volts to  passivate or reach  equilibrium. The sample  was then made more anodic  at  the  rate  of 0.7  volts per  hour until pitting occurred, as indicated by a large  increase in  current. The total voltage range scanned  was approximately - 0.3  to  1.0  volts.  From these  data  the  pitting potential was obtained.

The pitting potential was experimentally defined as that voltage where the  anodic  polarization data  exceeded 0.02  mA  without  repassivation, i.e., decreases of  c u r rent  below 0.02  mA.  While the  pitting potential is  generally defined as that voltage where a current surge  is observed, the  above  method,  which may be called an offset pitting potential, was employed to  simplify the

<!-- image -->

Fig.  1--Anodic  polarization data  for 18 pct Cr, 18 pct  Mn stainless steels of  i n c r e a s i n g nitrogen  content.  Offset  pitting  potential has been determined  by the  intersection of  the anodic  polarization data  with  the  offset pitting amperage. 1" indicates data  for  Alloy 1 after  thermal ferritization.

Fig.  2--The  effect of  n i t r o g e n   additions upon the  offset pitting  potential of 18 pct  Cr, 18 pet  Mn  stainless steels.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  3--The  effect of  n i t r o g e n additions upon the  relative amount of  austenite observed  in  18 pet  Cr, i8 pet  Mn  stainless  steels.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  4--Microstructures  of 18 pct Cr-18 pet Mn  stainless steels of  v a r y i n g   nitrogen contents.  The  addition  of 0.40 pet  nitrogen produced a nearly  austenitic structure,  Magnification 740 times.

<!-- image -->

determination of  the  pitting potential. The offset method permits  the  determination of  a potential where both crevice  pitting at  the  metal  Teflon  interface and general  pitting have  begun.  For instance, where the  anodic polarization data  exceeded  0.02 mA  and then  repassi- vated  as shown in  Fig.  1 for  Alloys  1 and 3,  it  was felt that  the  p a s s i v e film  had reformed  and the  higher  pitttng  potential was recorded.  The offset method also simplified the  potential determination for  Alloys  1 (ferritized) and 7 shown in  Fig.  1,  where the  onset  of

(00

Fig.  S--The effect of  the  a u s t e n i t e content  on the  offset pitting  potential of 18 pct  Cr, 18 pct  Mn  stainless steel.

<!-- image -->

pitting might  be assigned to  a number  of  potentials. Reproducibility of  the  anodic  polarization data  was determined  by a single replication. The offset pitting potential agreed  to  within  0.04  volts for  the  compositions examined.

The determination of  the  r e l a t i v e amounts of  austenire  and ferrite was made by metallographic examination for  the  totally austenitic or ferritic steels and the  duplex  alloys were examined by X-ray techniques on samples  of  final annealed  and pickled  strip that  were prepared  for  examination by electropolishing to a depth  of 0.003 to  0.005 in.  (0.075  to  0.125  mm)  to  eliminate any surface  effects. The samples  were mounted on a diffractometer and the  peak intensities of  the  austenite and ferrite (222)  and (220)  peaks  were measured using CrK~  radiation and the  degree  of  texture was measured for  each  phase using  MoK~ radiation. The peak intensities were subsequently corrected to  r a n d o m   o r i e n t a t i o n and the  ratio of  peak intensities determined  the  phase balance  of  the  steel using  standard  sample comparisons.

## RESULTS

The effects of nitrogen additions upon the (offset) pitting potential of  the  18  pet Or,  18  pet  Mn  stainless steel are  shown  in  Fig. 2.  The  addition of  nitrogen was found  to  increase the  pitting potential or  provide greater pitting resistance. These  data  indicated that the  pitting potential increased rapidly for nitrogen additions up  to

0.40  pct  after which the  effect of  nitrogen was diminished.  The effect of  nitrogen additions upon the  relative amount of  austenite is  shown in  Fig.  3. The addition of nitrogen was found  to  increase the  amount of  austenite by a factor of  200 times  the  percent  nitrogen added witt the  exception of  s m a l l   nitrogen additions which were accommodated without  markedly  altering the  amount of  austenite in  the  n i t r o g e n - f r e e alloy.  The addition of 0.40  pct  nitrogen was found  to  nearly  austenitize the steel as observed  by metallographic examination, Fig. 4. It  was found  that  effect of  nitrogen additions upon the  pitting resistance could  be divided into  two regions: 1)  The elimination of  f e r r i t e in  the  s t r u c t u r e of  the  duplex  steels and 2) The addition of  nitrogen to  the  totally austenitic steels. The effect of  nitrogen additions in  the first region  is  shown in  Fig.  5. These data  displayed that  the  pitting resistance increased linearly with  the amount of  austenite in  the  duplex  structure. The effect of  nitrogen additions in  the  second  region  has been shown in Fig.  2 for  nitrogen contents  in  excess  of  0.40 pct.  These data  displayed that  the  pitting resistance of austenitic 18  Cr, 18  Mn  stainless  teel was increased by the  addition of  nitrogen. This improved pitting resistance was displayed between 0.40  pct  N  where the steel became austenitic and 0.69  pct  N  where the  steel was saturated with  nitrogen resulting in  ingot  porosity.

## DISC USSION

It  i s   c l e a r   from the  results described above that  the addition of  nitrogen increases the  pitting resistance of 18  Cr, 18  Mn  steel. The addition of  nitrogen to  duplex steels eliminated ferrite (which  decreased  the  pitting resistance) and was in  agreement  with  the  results obtained by Streicher 9  and by Odar and Smith. 1~ This study  also  has shown that  the  addition of  nitrogen increases  the  pitting resistance of  t o t a l l y austenitic steels. While this  was in  agreement  with  the  studies of  both  Uhlig 4  and Streicher, 9  t h e   e f f e c t of  nitrogen observed  in  this  work was more pronouhced  than  that  observed  by Streicher 9  in  that  no molybdenum  or silicon addition was required  in  addition to  the  nitrogen for  increased  pitting resistance. Finally, the  totally ferritic steel was found to  be inferior to  the  nitrogen austenitized  steel. While this  effect of  s t r u c t u r e is  not  in agreement  with  that observed  by Uhlig  for  the 18  Cr, 8  Ni steel, the  addition of  0.40  pct  nitrogen in  the  austenitic 18  Cr, 18  Mn  steel imparts  additional corrosion resistance to  this  steel such that  comparison  with  the ferritic 18  Cr, 18  Mn  steel without  nitrogen cannot  be made directly.

The relation between the  pitting potential and amount of  austentte in  s t e e l s bears  further explanation. Since the  austenite and ferrite are galvanically coupled,  the potential of  the  couple  lies between the  potential of  the austenite and the  ferrite as described by Fontana  and Greene  21  for  galvanic couples  of  dissimilar metals. Fontana  and Greene describe the  effect of  a l t e r i n g the areas  of  the  metals  galvanically coupled  and conclude that  as the  area  of  the  m o r e   noble  metal  is  i n c r e a s e d the  corrosion potential increases. The addition of  n i trogen  to  the  duplex  steels increases the  amount and the  a r e a   of  the  a u s t e n i t e , the  more noble  phase in  these alloys. Therefore, the  pitting potential of  duplex  alloys has increased by the  mechanism described above and

has been described in  terms of  the amount of austenite in the sample.

The addition  of  nitrogen  to  totally austenitie 18  Cr, 18  Mn  steels produced an increased  pitting resistance which resulted  in  approximately  a 0.31  volt  per percent nitrogen  added. While this  effect has been observed,  no mechanism  has been uncovered for  the increased  pitting resistance.

## SUMMARY AND  CONCLUSIONS

The effects of nitrogen upon the pitting  resistance of 18  Cr, 18  Mn  stainless steel  have been determined by potentlokinetic techniques.  The pitting  resistance of the thermally ferritized steel  was inferior to the duplex steels which were inferior to the austenitic steels. The addRion of  nitrogen increased the pitting  resistance of  the duplex steels and was a linear function of  the amount of austenlte in  these steels. This increased pittlng potential  was related to the effects of nitrogen in the austenite and relative areas of  the austenite and ferrite which were galvanically coupled.  The addition of  nitrogen to the totally  austenitic steels increased their pitting  resistance but no mechanism  was found for the increase.  The addition of  nitrogen was found to increase the relative amount of austenite by a factor of 200 times the percent nitrogen added.

## REFERENCES

1. Nitrogen in  Chromium  Alloy Steels, p.  17, Electro Metallurgical Company of Union  Carbide, 1941.
2.  H.  Spahn, H.  Spekchardt, and  W.  Wessling: Chem.  Ing. Tech., 1966, vol. 38, pp.  407-17.
3. T.  G.  Gooch:  Metal Constr., t969, vol. 1, no.  12, pp.  569-74.
4.  H.  H.  Uhlig: Trans. ASM, 1942, vol. 30,  pp.  947-80.
5. O.  Steensland: J. Iron  Steel 1969, vol. 42,  no.  2, pp.  104-08.
6. W. Tofaunte  and A.  Schottky: Arch.  Eisenhftttenw., 1942, vol. 15, p.  515.
7. Y.  S. Medvedev  and  T.  D.  Tomilina: Zashch. MetaL, 1969, vol. 5, no.  4, pp.  394-99.
8.  H.  Bermek: Arch.  Eisenhiittenw., 1942, voL 15, p.  515.
9. M. A.  Streicher: J. Electrocherr~ Soc., 1956, vol. 103, no.  7, pp.  375-90.
10. S.  P. Odar  and  H.  A.  Smith: Trans. AIME, 1939, vol. 135, pp.  526-28.
11. G.  V.  Kortvshenko, V.  I. Grigorkin, and  A.  V.  Zaslavskii: lzv. Vyssh. Ucheb. Zaved.  Chem. Met., 1969, vol. 12, no.  8, pp.  124-26.
12. A.  Condylis, F.  Bayou, and  A.  I)esestret: Rev.  Met., 1970, vol. 5, pp.  399-412.
13.  J. J. Heger: Mechanical Properties and  Corrosion Resistance of  a  High-Strength Chromium-Manganese-Nitrogen.Stainless Steel, ASTM, STP 369, 1965, pp. 54-61.
14.  B.  B.  Nighawan, P.  K.  Gupte~ S.  S.  Bhatnagar, B.  K.  Guha,  and  S.  S. Dhanjah J. Iron  Steellnst., 1967, vol. 205, pp.  292.304.
15. W. Koster: Arch.  Eisenhiittenw., 1934, vol. 7, pp.  687-88.
16.  D.  J, Carney: U.S. Patent No.  2,778,731.
17.  H.  Bennek: Arch.  Eisenhiittenw., 1942, vol. 15,  p. 515.
18. K.  Bungandt: Stahl Eisen, 1950, vol, 70,  pp.  582-96.
19. M. J. Johnson: Relative Critical Potentials/or Pitting Corrosion of  Some Stainless Steels, ASTM, STP-516,  1972, pp.  262-72.
20.  M.  Stern and  A.  C.  Makfides: J. Electrochem. Soc., 1960, vol. 107, p.  782.
21. M. Fontana and N.  Greene: Corrosion Engineering, pp. 330-35, McGraw-Hill Co., 1967.