## SELECTED CORROSION PROPERTIES OF A NEW AMORPHOUS AL-CO-CE ALLOY SYSTEM

M. E. Goldman, N. Ünlü, G. J. Shiflet, and J. R. Scully Department of Materials Science and Engineering University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA 22903 USA

## ABSTRACT

Selected corrosion properties of the recently developed amorphous Al-Co-Ce alloy system are reported. Improved  resistance  to  halide-induced  pitting  was  observed  in  near  neutral  solution  when  the  fully amorphous alloy and an aged alloy (100 ° C for up to1000 hrs.) were compared to high purity aluminum. Both the open circuit potential and the repassivation potential were found to be strongly influenced by the  concentration  of  cobalt  in  the  alloy.    Tunable  corrosion  properties  based  on  pre-selection  of  Co content is shown to be feasible.  This alloy system also showed improved resistance to rapid dissolution in alkaline solutions, in contrast with the behavior of pure aluminum.  However, in acidic solutions the dissolution rate of the amorphous alloy was increased when compared to pure aluminum.  These unique properties of the amorphous alloys remained after structural relaxation and/or partial devitrification by low  temperature  heat-treatments  at  100 ° C.    However,  complete  recrystallization  by  550 ° C  heat treatment removed all benefits seen in amorphous variants.

Keywords:  amorphous  alloys,  local  corrosion,  passivity,  devitrification,  Al-Co-Ce  alloys,  tunable corrosion properties, depassivation

## INTRODUCTION

Over the past several years, a wide range of novel amorphous alloys have been produced with ETM-LTM-SM compositions (where ETM-LTM-SM signifies Early Transition Metal-Late Transition Metal-Simple  Metal).    These  amorphous  alloys  offer  significant  enhancements  of  both  mechanical strength and corrosion resistance over their fully crystalline counterparts 1-5 .    One  subset  of  the  ETMLTM-SM compositions showing particular promise as high-strength low-density material is the class of Al-TM-RE alloy compositions.  These alloys have demonstrated high glass-forming abilities as well as

improved  corrosion  resistance  over  conventional  aluminum  alloys 6,7 .    In  addition  this  class  of  alloys possesses the capacity to develop nanocrystals in an amorphous matrix upon appropriate heat treatment 8 . Such  nanocrystals  have  been  shown  to  further  enhance  the  mechanical  properties  without  adversely affecting the improved corrosion resistance normally associated with fully amorphous alloys 9,10 .

One  alloy  system  within  the  Al-TM-RE  class  of  amorphous  alloys  that  has  recently  been characterized is Al-Co-Ce 11,12 .  This system has shown to have high thermal stability, as well as a large compositional  range  over  which  an  amorphous  microstructure  can  be  obtained 13 .    By  making  use  of these unique physical characteristics, as well as the beneficial influence which transition metals have on the barrier corrosion properties 7 and sacrificial coating capabilities 3,5 when added to solid solution of amorphous aluminum, the opportunity exists to create a multifunctional metallic coating.  Additional benefit of this system as a coating comes from the possibility of an active corrosion inhibition function provided  by  the  release  and  delivery  of  the  oxidation  products  of  Co  and  Ce.    Although  no  known previous study has focused on the release of these elements from solid solution of aluminum, Co(II) and Ce  (III)  have  shown  great  promise  as  inhibitors  when  deposited  on  the  surface  of  aluminum  from aqueous  solution 13-19 .    In  addition,  recent  preliminary  studies  have  demonstrated  active  corrosion inhibition  where  an  Al-Co-Ce  coating  is  placed  in  close  proximity  to  2024-T3  through  release  and transport of Co(II) and Ce(III) in the aqueous solution 20 .

In  order  to  optimize  each  of  these  coating  functions,  a  full  understanding  is  needed  of  each alloying element's individual influence on corrosion properties.  By examining the corrosion behavior over a wide compositional range of amorphous alloys within the Al-Co-Ce system, the effect of both Co and Ce can be isolated, resulting in a tunable alloy system.  This study reports on selected corrosion properties  as  they  relate  to  alloy  composition  within  the  amorphous  Al-Co-Ce  system.    Specifically, dissolution over a range of pH values is examined, resistance to pitting in halide solutions is explored, and lastly the examination of the open circuit potentials is carried out to investigate the possibility that this alloy could function as a sacrificial anode.

## EXPERIMENTAL

To assess the barrier corrosion properties of various Al-Co-Ce alloy compositions, a set of diagnostic parameters is needed to quantify each composition's corrosion behavior.  Included in the properties to be assessed were the pitting resistance in halide solution, the dissolution rate at various pH values, and the mixed potential behavior over a range of pH values.  The four parameters chosen to characterize these corrosion  properties  in  this  preliminary  report  were  the  open-circuit  potential  (OCP),  passive  current density  (ipass),  pitting  potential  (Epit),  and  repassivation  potential  (Erp).  The  pitting  and  repassivation potentials served as indicators of the pitting resistance, while the passive current density was used to assess the dissolution rate as a function of pH.  Open-circuit potentials were gathered to assist in gauging the  galvanic  corrosion  behavior  of  this  alloy  (e.g.,  potential  driving  force  for  sacrificial  cathodic protection when coupled to AA2024-T3).

Al-Co-Ce  amorphous  metal  ribbons  were  prepared  by  using  a  single-wheel  melt-spinning technique under a helium atmosphere.  A circumferential wheel speed of 52 m/s was used to produce lengths of ribbon that were approximately 20 µ m thick and 2 mm wide.  The ingots used in producing these ribbons were prepared from materials with the following purities: &gt;99.999% Al, &gt;99.995% Co, and &gt;99.9% Ce. The compositions of the alloys examined ranged from 0-10 atomic % cobalt and 3-11 atomic  %  cerium  with  aluminum  composing  the  remainder  (Table  I).    These  particular  compositions were  selected  for  analysis  due  to  their  either  wholly  amorphous  or  largely  amorphous  +  isolated crystalline microstructures, as shown in the Al-Co-Ce structural map developed by Unlu and Inoue 21 for alloy  ribbons  produced  with  a  wheel  speed  of  52  m/s  (Figure  1).    Following  their  production,  noncrystalline microstructures were  verified through  x-ray diffraction (Figure 2). The  diffraction measurements were conducted with a Scintag X-Ray diffractometer using Cu K α radiation at 40 kV and 35 mA settings in the 2 θ range from 10 ° to 80 ° .    While it is well known that x-ray diffraction (XRD)

cannot  differentiate  between  wholly  amorphous  microstructures  and  those  containing  small  volume fractions of nanocrystals in an amorphous matrix 22 , it has also been shown that most of the parameters examined in this study are unaffected by the presence of nanocrystals less than 10 nm in diameter 9,  23 . However,  one  parameter  that  has  been  shown  to  be  influenced  by  the  presence  of  any  structural heterogeneity in otherwise amorphous materials, such as nanocrystals, is Epit 9, 10 .  Therefore, conclusions cannot be made on the compositional dependence of Epit within the Al-Co-Ce alloy system without a thorough characterization of the nano-scale microstructure as a function of composition.

To examine the retention of barrier properties for this alloy system following low temperature heat treatments, a series of artificial aging treatments were carried out for the Al87Co7Ce6 composition. These treatments result in either devitrification of the initially amorphous material via the formation of isolated  small-scale  crystalline  regions  or  relaxation  of  the  as-spun  amorphous  state.    In  an  approach similar  to  investigations  previously  conducted  on  the  Al-Fe-Gd  system 23 ,  the  amorphous  ribbon  was placed in a furnace maintained at 100 ° C, and exposed for 1, 10, 100, and 1000 hours.  In addition, a high-temperature 24-hour exposure at 550 ° C was also carried out to induce complete recrystallization. No encapsulation was necessary due to the polishing procedures used to remove the effects of thermal oxidation.  Complete microstructural characterization was conducted by Csontos 24 on similarly treated Al-Fe-Gd  amorphous  alloys  to  reveal  isolated  nanocrystal  development  at  the  lower  temperature treatments  and  full  recrystallization  occurring  when  samples  were  treated  at  550 ° C.    To  confirm  a similar  response  to  heat-treatments  for  the  Al-Co-Ce  system,  XRD  was  conducted  on  24-hour  550 o C exposed and 100-hour 100 o C exposed Al87Co7Ce6 material.  As can be seen from Figure 2 and ?, the high-temperature treatment resulted in full recrystallization and the low-temperature treatment produced aluminum nanocrystals.

Ribbon samples were prepared for electrochemical experiments by mounting on end in Buehler  low-viscosity epoxy resin which allowed the cross-section of the ribbon (area ~10 -4 cm 2 ) to be exposed when testing in a conventional electrochemical flat cell.  This resin had a curing temperature of 28 ° C, which  maintained  the  samples  near  room  temperature  during  mounting  to  prevent  inadvertent nanocrystal formation due to thermal effects 9 .  The sample surface was prepared before each test by wetpolishing on SiC paper to a grit of 1200, followed by a final polish with 1 µ m alumina suspension and then rinsing with deionized water.

Electrochemical  tests  were  carried  out  using  a  PAR  273A  potentiostat  under  control  of CorrWare  corrosion measurement software.  In addition to the working electrode, the three-electrode cell was equipped with a platinum mesh counter electrode, and a saturated calomel reference electrode. Potential values are reported versus SCE for all tests conducted in this study.  The solutions used were prepared with deionized water and ACS certified reagents, and included 0.6 M NaCl solution adjusted to different pH values using either 1 M NaOH or 1 M HCl.

The  typical  experimental  test  began  with  a  one  hour  open-circuit  exposure  to  25 ° C  nitrogenpurged solution, immediately followed by a potentiodynamic scan starting at -0.1 Vocp, then anodically polarizing at a rate of 0.1 mV/sec until reversing scan direction when current density reached a threshold of 1,000 µ A/cm 2 .  From these scans the four diagnostic parameters were extracted, including OCP, ipass, Epit,  and Erp.  When the Epit and Erp parameter values from potentiodynamic scans were not clear, Epit was taken as the potential at which the current density reached a value two orders of magnitude above ipass  and  Erp  was  taken  as  the  potential  where  the  current  density  decreased  below  10 -2 A/cm 2 on  the reverse scan.  Although the pit depth and total charge were comparable from trial to trial there was some minor  fluctuation  in  these  values.    However,  examination  of  the  results  showed  Erp  values  to  be independent of the small variances in either pit depth, total charge, or exposed electrode area.

For each composition, multiple scans (10-20) were carried out to obtain a statistically accurate value  for  each  of  the  parameters.  This  data  was  then  used  to  construct  cumulative  probability  plots, which  compared  the  parameter  values  for  all  alloy  compositions  tested.    Mean  values  from  each

composition were also calculated and used to plot the corrosion parameter values as a function of each alloying  element.    This  revealed  the  influence  of  the  individual  elements  in  controlling  the  corrosion behaviors.  As mentioned previously, the relationship between Epit and specific elemental composition within the Al-Co-Ce system could not be accurately developed due to the possible influence of nanoscale heterogeneities undetectable with standard XRD techniques.

Finally, additional scans were conducted on similarly mounted high-purity aluminum (99.999%) and Al 2024-T3 for comparison purposes.  The results from these tests were plotted along with those obtained  from  the  Al-Co-Ce  system  to  gauge  the  differences  in  corrosion  behavior  between  the amorphous alloys and the conventional materials.

## RESULTS

## PH Dependent Corrosion Behavior

The influence of pH on both OCP and dissolution rate was examined for a variety of the alloy compositions within the Al-Co-Ce system, and the results were compared with similar tests conducted on AA 2024-T3 (Figure 3).  Both the AA 2024-T3 and the amorphous alloys in the Al-Co-Ce system exhibited  a  decrease  in  the  OCP  as  the  pH  values  increased  from  2  to  12  in  deaerated  0.6  M  NaCl solution. When AA 2024-T3 was tested in deaerated solution, the OCP ranged from -1.109 VSCE in pH 4 solution to -1.224 VSCE in pH 12 solution.  Although the Al-Co-Ce behavior varied depending on the particular alloy composition, each alloy showed a decrease in OCP as the solution pH was raised.  When the pH increased from 3 to 10, the OCP of Al90Co3Ce7 decreased by 0.225 VSCE, Al84Co5Ce11 decreased by 0.121 VSCE, and Al87Co7Ce6 decreased by 0.150 VSCE.  Moreover, the OCP at a given pH decreases with decreasing Co content as will be further discussed below.  A contrasting response to pH variance is seen in the OCP values of AA 2024-T3 in the aerated 0.6 M NaCl solution as compared to the AA 2024T3 and amorphous alloys in deaerated solution, with the OCP showing little variation as the pH of the test solution is raised.  When tested in a pH 2 solution, the AA 2024-T3 has an OCP of -0.69 VSCE and increases to -0.560 VSCE in a solution of pH 12 owing to Cu replating.

The dissolution behavior for the amorphous Al-Co-Ce alloys was also shown to be significantly different  from  pure  aluminum  when tested as a function  of  pH  (Figure  4).    In  0.6  M  NaCl  solutions adjusted to acidic pH values, the amorphous alloys displayed a passive current density (ipass) that was 2 to  3  times  greater  than  that  of  the  high  purity  aluminum  samples.  For  example,  the  AI87Co8.7Ce4.3 amorphous alloy had an ipass of 5.4 × 10 -5 A/cm 2 in a 0.6 M NaCl solution of pH 2, while the high purity Al had an ipass of only 2.5 × 10 -5 A/cm 2 in a similar solution.  In contrast, the passive current density of the alloys was significantly lower than that of high purity aluminum in highly alkaline solutions.  At a pH  value  of  11,  the  pure  Al  sample  exhibited  an  ipass  of  1.25 × 10 -4 A/cm 2 while  the  amorphous Al87Co8.7Ce4.3 alloy had a value of only 1.6 × 10 -5 A/cm 2 .  There were no detectable differences in the current densities of scans conducted over a range of near-neutral pH values.  Current densities of the alloys heat treated to 100 ° C exhibited no significant deviation from the as-quenched amorphous material when similarly tested over the range of pH values, also seen in Figure 4.

## Local Corrosion Properties

Alloys  of  the  amorphous  Al-Co-Ce  system  displayed  pit  formation  but  exhibited  localized corrosion properties in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl solution that were significantly different from high purity polycrystalline  aluminum,  including  a  several  hundred  mV  elevation  of  both  Epit  and  Erp.  Such significant differences are not a result of small at-risk areas or differing pit sizes, which were avoided by using similarly sized samples in all cases with pits grown to comparable depths 25, 10 .  An example of this behavior is seen in Figure 5, where the fully amorphous Al90Co7Ce3 sample has a pitting potential that is raised 328 mV above that of the high purity polycrystalline Al sample. In addition, the repassivation potential of the Al90Co7Ce3 alloy is increased by 371 mV relative to the Erp of pure Al.  Such behavior

was found in all of the fully amorphous alloys examined in the Al-Co-Ce system (3-11 at. % Co), as illustrated  in  Table  2,  which  summarizes  the  Epit  and  Erp  results  for  a  number  of  the  compositions examined.  For alloys shown in Table 2, the means of the Epit values ranged from 450 mV to 487 mV higher than the mean Epit value for pure Al, while the alloy's Erp mean values ranged from 390 mV to 429 mV higher than that of the high purity Al.  Also observed for the Al-Co-Ce system was the high statistical  reproducibility  of  Erp  compared  to  the  widely  distributed  values  of  Epit,  in  agreement  with results from other Al-based amorphous metals 9 .

## Tunable Corrosion Properties Based on Alloy Composition

Two  of  the  selected  local  corrosion  property  metrics  showed  a  direct  dependence  on  alloy composition, specifically on the atomic percentage of cobalt.  As cobalt content is varied from 0 to 10 atomic percent, the Erp mean values for each composition follow a linear trend upwards from -0.85 VSCE for alloys with 0% cobalt to span 400 mV, before reaching a plateau of -0.33 VSCE at a cobalt value of 7% (Figure 6).  This same response to cobalt composition was also seen in the mean OCP values, where compositions  with  0%  cobalt  had  a  mean  OCP  value  of  -1.4  VSCE,  but  as  cobalt  composition  was increased  to  7%  the  OCP  rose  to  -0.6  VSCE  (Figure  7).    It  should  be  noted  that  Al-(Co)-Ce  alloys containing  0-1%  Co  contained  nanocrystals  in  the  as-quenched  condition  as  indicated  by  Figure  1. Similar  influences  were  not  found  when  EOCP  values  were  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  cerium  or aluminum contents.  However, when cobalt content was held constant at 7 atomic %, a slight decrease in the OCP was seen with increasing cerium content.  This also held true for the Erp values, suggesting that cobalt exerts the dominant influence on both properties, while cerium content plays a secondary role. When  Epit  and  ipass  behaviors  were  examined  as  a  function  of  alloy  composition,  no  statistically significant influences could be found for any of the three elemental components from potentiodynamic scans.

An  additional  investigation  was  carried  out  to  determine  if  the  Al-Co-Ce  system  retained  its tunable OCP property in non-neutral solutions.  A selection of alloys were tested in 0.6 M NaCl solution adjusted to either pH 3 or pH 10, and the OCP was measured after one hour exposure to the solution (Figure  7).    The  results  indicate  that,  although  there  is  a  shift  in  the  OCP  values  for  each  alloy composition as the solution pH changes, the OCP shows a similar dependence on cobalt concentration at each pH solution examined (i.e., the OCP increases with Co content).

## Retention of Electrochemical Properties upon Low Temperature Aging

Scans conducted on Al-Co-Ce alloys artificially aged at 100 ° C showed excellent retention and selective improvement of the localized corrosion metrics (Figure 8).  The mean values of both OCP and Erp  showed  no  significant  variation  as  the  amorphous  material  was  heat-treated  with  increasing  time duration at 100 ° C.  However, the mean Epit values of the 100 ° C heat treated samples were all elevated above that of the as-received material.  Only those samples that were fully recrystallized (24 hours at 550 ° C)  had  a  reduced  mean  pitting  potential  and  lowered  mean  repassivation  potential,  as  shown  in Figure  9.  Specific  microstructural  characterization  through  XRD  is  underway  for  each  of  these  low temperature heat-treatments, allowing for the electrochemical behavior to be definitively linked to the development of nanocrystals.

## DISCUSSION

All amorphous alloys examined in the Al-Co-Ce system were shown to have improved localized corrosion resistance as compared to high-purity aluminum, in the form of elevated Epit and Erp values (Figure 6). While the elevated Epit values may be attributed to the amorphous microstructure of the alloy material 9 , the altered repassivation potential is most likely due to the presence of TM in solid solution.

An  additional  effect  of  the  TM  and  RE  alloying  elements  is  the  altered  pH  dependent  dissolution behavior which the amorphous alloys demonstrate when compared to the well-known behavior of pure aluminum (Figure 4).  Pourbaix diagrams 26 for  each  of  the  alloying  elements  indicate  that  aluminum forms  an  insoluble  hydroxide  (Al(OH)3)  in  the  potential  range  investigated  when  pH  ranges  from approximately 3 to 10, while cobalt and cerium actively dissolve when pH values decrease below 6. Cobalt and cerium in substitutional solid solution in the amorphous phase are credited for the increased dissolution of the amorphous alloys when compared to high-purity aluminum examined in moderately acidic  solutions.    In  contrast,  when  the  amorphous  alloys  were  examined  in  alkaline  solutions,  the dissolution rate of the alloys was much slower than high-purity aluminum due to likely formation of passivating insoluble oxides formed by both cobalt and cerium in this pH region (most likely Ce(OH)3 and Co(OH)2).  The OCP values for amorphous (2-11% Co) and amorphous + nanocrystalline (0-1% Co) Al-Co-Ce alloys were also shown to be strongly influenced by the addition of alloying elements into the  solid  solution  of  aluminum,  with  cobalt  raising  the  open  circuit  values  significantly  (Figure  8). These influences allow the OCP to be controlled through alloying additions, resulting in an amorphous alloy with tunable electrochemical properties.

Another parameter associated with localized  corrosion  that  was  found  to  be  tunable  based  on alloy  composition  was  Erp.    The  increase  of  cobalt  content  in  solid  solution  resulted  in  a  dramatic elevation in the Erp values (Figure 7).  Such a strong influence is most likely due to either a decrease on the pit dissolution rate or the need for more concentrated critical depassivating pit solution for cobaltcontaining alloys.  Further investigations to isolate the mechanism by which cobalt elevates OCP and Erp are currently underway.

## CONCLUSIONS

1. Localized corrosion resistance in near neutral halide solution is  enhanced  for  all  fully  amorphous alloys  of  the  Al-Co-Ce  system  when  compared  to  pure  polycrystalline  aluminum,  in  the  form  of elevated Epit and Erp mean values.
2. As cobalt  concentration  within  the  bulk  amorphous  alloy  is  raised,  the  open  circuit  potential  and repassivation  potential  both  show  concurrent  increases  in  their  values  when  tested  in  near-neutral halide solutions.
3. Dissolution kinetics of the amorphous Al-Co-Ce alloys in acidic and alkaline solutions are altered from those of pure aluminum.  The alloys show reduced dissolution in alkaline environments and increased dissolution in acidic environments.
4. Low-temperature heat treatments that result in structural relaxation and/or partial devitrification did not  result  in  a  loss  of  the  enhanced  corrosion  properties  shown  by  the  as-quenched  amorphous alloys.  However, complete recrystallization negated all benefits of alloying and the amorphous state.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

A Multi-University Research Initiative (Grant No. F49602-01-1-0352) entitled 'The Development of an Environmentally Compliant Multifunctional Coating for Aerospace Applications using Molecular and Nano-Engineered Methods' under the direction of Dr. Paul C. Trulove at AFOSR partially supported this  study,  while  the  remainder    of  the  support  was  from  the  National  Science  Foundation  (DMR0204840)

## REFERENCES

1. Mausmoto, T., "Recent Progress in Amorphous Metallic Materials in Japan," Materials Science and Engineering , vol. A179/A180, 8-16 (1994).

2. He, Y., S. J. Poon, and G. J. Shiflet, "Synthesis and Properties of Meallic Glasses that Contain Aluminum," Science , vol. 241, 1640-1642 (1988).
3. Sanchette, F. and A. Billard, "Main Features of Magnetron Sputtered Aluminum-Transition Metal Alloy Coatings," Surface and Coatings Technology , vol. 142-144, 218-224 (2001).
4. Inoue, A. and T. Masumoto, "Light-Metal Base Amorphous Alloys Containing Lanthanide Metal," Journal of Alloys and Compounds , vol. 207/208, 340-348 (1994).
5. Sanchette, F., A. Billard, and C. Frantz, "Mechanically Reinforced and Corrosion-Resistant Sputtered Amorphous Aluminium Alloy Coatings," Surface and Coatings Technology , vol. 98, 1162-1168 (1998).
6. Kabacoff, L. T., C. P. Wong, N. L. Guthrie, and S. Dallek, "Formation and Stability of Magnetron Sputtered Al-TM-RE Metallic Glasses," Materials Science and Engineering , vol. A134, 1288-1291 (1991).
7. He, Y., H. Chen, G. Shiflet, and S. J. Poon, "On the Structural Nature of Aluminium-Based Metallic Glasses," Philosophical Magazine Letters , vol. 61, 297-303 (1990).
8. Chen, H., Y. He, G. J. Shiflet, and S. J. Poon, "Mechanical Properties of Partially Crystallized Aluminum Based Metallic Glasses," Scripta Metallurgica , vol. 25, 1421-1424 (1991).
9. Sweitzer, J. E., G. J. Shiflet, and J. R. Scully, "Localized Corrosion of Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 Alloys in the Amorphous, Nanocrystalline and Crystalline States: Resistance to Micrometer-Scale Pit Formation," Electrochimica Acta , vol. 48, 1223-1234 (2003).
10. Sweitzer, J. E., J. R. Scully, R. A. Bley, and J. W. P. Hsu, "Nanocrystalline Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 Alloys that Retain the Localized Corrosion Resistance of the Amorphous State," Electrochemical and Solid State Letters , vol. 2, 267-270 (1999).
11. Mansour, A. N., C. P. Wong, and R. A. Brizzolara, "Atomic Structure of Amorphous Al1002xCoxCex (x=8, 9, 10) and Al80Fe10Ce10 Alloys: An XAFS Study," Physical Review B , vol. 50, 12401-12412 (1994).
12. Gao, M., N. Unlu, M. Jakab, J. Scully, and G. J. Shiflet, "Amorphous Al-Co-Ce Alloy with Potential Excellent Corrosion Resistance," presented at Tri-Service Corrosion Conference, San Antonio, TX (2002), 1323-1330.
13. Hinton, B., D. R. Arnott, and N. E. Ryan, "The Inhibition of Aluminum Alloy corrosion by Cerous Cations," Met. Forum , vol. 7, 211-217 (1984).
14. Arnott, D. R., N. E. Ryan, B. R. W. Hinton, B. A. Sexton, and A. E. Hughes, "Auger and XPS Studies of Cerium Corrosion Inhibition on 7075 Aluminum Alloy," Applied Surface Science , vol. 22-23, 236-251 (1985).

15. Mansfield, F., S. Lin, S. Kim, and H. Shih, "Corrosion Protection of Aluminum Alloys and Aluminum-Based Metal Matrix Composites by Chemical Passivation," Corrosion , vol. 45, 615630 (1989).
16. Mansfield, F., S. Lin, S. Kim, and H. Shih, "Surface Modification of Aluminum Alloys and Aluminum-Based Metal Matrix Composites by Chemical Passivation," Electrochimica Acta , vol. 34, 1123-1132 (1989).
17. Mansfield, F., S. Lin, S. Kim, and H. Shih, "Pitting and Passivation of Aluminum Alloys and Aluminum-Based Metal Matrix Composites," Journal of the Electrochemical Society , vol. 137, 78-82 (1990).
18. Kabasakaloglu, M., H. Aydin, H. Aydin, and M. L. Aksu, "Inhibitors for the Protection of Aerospace Aluminum Alloy," Materials and Corrosion , vol. 48, 744-754 (1997).
19. Schriever, M. P., "Non-Chromated Oxide Coating for Aluminum Substrates," U.S. Patent No. 5,378,293. (1993).
20. Jakab, M., F. Presuel-Moreno, and J. R. Scully, "Cerium, Cobalt, and Molybdenum Ion Storage States, Release, and Corrosion Inhibition when Delivered from Oxides on Aluminum-Transition Metal-Rare Earth Metal Alloys," presented at Electrochemical Society, Orlando, FL (2003).
21. Inoue, A., K. Ohtera, K. Kita, and T. Masumoto, "New Amorphous Alloys with Good Ductility in Al-Ce-M (M = Nb, Fe, Co, Ni or Cu) Systems," Jpn. J. Appl Phys. 2 Lett. , vol. 27, L1796L1799 (1988).
22. Zhang, B., H. Habazaki, A. Hawashima, K. Asami, K. Hiraga, and K. Hashimoto, "The Effect of Microcrystallites in the Amorphous Matrix on the Corrosion Behavior of Melt-Spun Cr-Ni-P Alloys," Corrosion Science , vol. 32, 433-442 (1991).
23. Lucente, A. M., G. J. Shiflet, and J. R. Scully, "Localized Corrosion of an Al90Fe5Gd5 Alloy as a Function of Devitrification," presented at Electrochemical Society, Utah (2002).
24. Csontos, A. A. and G. J. Shiflet, "Formation and Chemistry of Nanocrystalline Phases Formed During Deformation in Aluminum-Rich Metallic Glasses," Nano-Structured Materials , vol. 9, 281-289 (1997).
25. Burnstein, G. T. and G. O. Ilevbare, "The Effect of Specimen Size on the Measured Pitting Potential of Stainless Steel," Corrosion Science , vol. 38, 2257-2265 (1996).
26. Pourbaix, M., Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions . Houston, TX: NACE, (1974).
27. Jones, D. A., Principles and Prevention of Corrosion . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., (1996).

Table I. Al-Co-Ce amorphous alloy compositions examined.

| Al 93 Ce 7       | Al 92 Ce 8      | Al 92 Co 1 Ce 7   | Al 91 Co 1 Ce 8   | Al 90 Co 3 Ce 7   | Al 89 Co 3 Ce 8     |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|---------------------|
| Al 84 Co 5 Ce 11 | Al 90 Co 7 Ce 3 | Al 87 Co 7 Ce 6   | Al 86 Co 7 Ce 7   | Al 83 Co 7 Ce 10  | Al 87 Co 8.7 Ce 4.3 |

Table  2. Mean pitting  and  repassivation  potentials  for  amorphous  Al-Co-Ce  alloys  and  high  purity polycrystalline  aluminum  (99.999%)  with  ~10 -4 cm 2 surface  areas  tested  in  deaerated  0.6  M  NaCl solution (pH 6).

Figure  1 .  Al-Co-Ce  alloy  system  map  designating amorphous compositions developed by Unlu and Inoue 21 for alloys produced with 52 m/s circumferential wheel speed, and with microstructure determined through  X-ray  diffraction,  TEM  bright  field  analysis, and TEM diffraction.

|                                     | E pit (V SCE )   | E rp (V SCE )   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|-----------------|
| Pure Aluminum (polycrystalline)     | -0.701 ± 0.016   | -0.736 ± 0.001  |
| Al 90 Co 7 Ce 3 (amorphous)         | -0.214 ± 0.020   | -0.307 ± 0.008  |
| Al 87 Co 8.7 Ce 4.3 (amorphous)     | -0.218 ± 0.028   | -0.346 ± 0.017  |
| Al 87 Co 7 Ce 6 (amorphous)         | -0.252 ± 0.026   | -0.317 ± 0.016  |
| Al 87 Co 7 Ce 6 (fully crystalline) | -0.674 ± 0.055   | -0.742 ± 0.015  |

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 . X-ray diffraction patterns (Cu K α radiation at 40 kV and 35 mA) for the melt-spun Al87Co8.7Ce4.3 alloy ribbon (52 m/s wheel speed) showing the amorphous microstructure of the as-quenched material, the amorphous + nanocrystalline microstructure of the 100 hour 100 ° C treatment, and the crystalline microstructure which is developed after a nonisothermal 550 ° C heat-treatment.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure  3. Open  circuit  potentials  for  amorphous  AlCo-Ce alloy and AA 2024 after one-hour exposure to 0.6 M NaCl solution with pH adjusted using 1 M HCl or 1 M NaOH as necessary.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5. Potentiodynamic scans conducted on amorphous Al-Co-Ce alloy and 99.999% aluminum in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl solution (pH 6).  Both working electrode areas were ~10 -4 cm 2 .

Figure 4. Passive current densities for high purity Al 27 and amorphous alloys of the Al-Co-Ce system, including heat-treated nanocrystalline material, in solution adjusted to various pH values using concentrated HCl or 1 M NaOH as neccesary.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Repassivation potential for as-spun Al-Co-Ce alloys with 0 to 8.7 atomic percent cobalt in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl solution (pH 6) expressed as a function of cobalt.  Alloys with &gt;1% Co are fully amorphous while those with 0-1% Co contain nanocrystals.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Open circuit potentials of as-spun Al-Co-Ce samples  after  one-hour  exposure  to  deaerated  0.6  M NaCl solution (pH 6) expressed as a function of atomic percent  cobalt.    Alloys  with  greater  than  1%  Co  are fully  amorphous.    Data  compared  to  AA  2024-T3  in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl selected pH solutions.

Figure 9. Potentiodynamic scans conducted on amorphous and fully crystalline (following 550 ° C isothermal heat treatment) Al87Co7Ce6 alloys in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl solution.

<!-- image -->

Figure  8. Effect  of  100 ° C  isothermal  heat  treatments on Epit, Erp, and OCP values for Al87Co7Ce6 alloy when tested  in  deaerated  0.6  M  NaCl  after  a  one  hour exposure  to solution. Data  is compared  to  fully crystalline  Al87Co7Ce6  alloy  after  550 ° C  isothermal heat treatment.

<!-- image -->