<!-- image -->

## Abstract

The role of isothermal aging on the localized corrosion beha v ior of Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 alloys was characterized in 0.6 MNaCl solution. The pitting ( E pit) and repassi v ation ( E rp) potentials were both increased -/400 mV by the presence of transition and rare earth metal additions in supersaturated solid solution and amorphous structure. A statistical distribution in E pit obser v ed on small electrodes was due, in part, to the sensiti v ity of this critical potential to the presence of a population of critical surface flaws that ser v e as pit initiation sites. Mechanistic insight on the spacing of critical flaws was enabled by v arying the tested electrode surface area. E rp was not dependent on electrode surface area due to the similarity of pit depths in all electrode sizes. The critical potentials were also characterized after heat treating the amorphous ribbons isothermally at 150 8 C for 25 h and 550 8 C for 1 h. The former produced Al-rich nanocrystals embedded in the remaining amorphous matrix while the latter produced a fully crystalline condition containing intermetallic phases. Notably, the impro v ed resistance to the formation of micrometer-scale pits was not lost compared with the fully amorphous condition when small Al-rich nanocrystals were present in an amorphous matrix. Howe v er, impro v ement in pitting corrosion resistance was completely lost in the fully crystallized condition as indicated by v alues for E pit and E rp that were similar to those of high purity, polycrystalline aluminum.

#

2003 Else

v

ier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Amorphous alloy; De v itrification; Metallic coatings; Nanocrystalline; Pitting corrosion

## 1. Introduction

## 1.1. Opportunity for new metallic coatings

The opportunity exists to create new metallic coatings that exhibit a broad range of corrosion functions including acti v e corrosion inhibition (i.e., self-healing), corrosion barrier properties, sacrificial cathodic pre v ention, as well as resistance to cre v ice corrosion (e.g., alkaline or acidic dissolution) at faying surfaces in military components. One class of alloys that may be suitable for such coatings is a recently disco v ered Al-rich glass alloy system based on rare earth and transition metal compositions. Multi-functionality is possible because some of the same alloying elements that promote amorphous phase formation upon rapid cooling also

* Corresponding author. E-mail address: jrs8d@ v irginia.edu (J.R. Scully).

ha v e attributes that could impro v e a range of corrosion properties.

This paper focuses on the ability of two selected amorphous Al-based metallic alloys to resist formation of micrometer scale pits. One critical issue is the concern that de v itrification compromises the impro v ed localized corrosion resistance associated with the amorphous state. The effects of heat treatment-induced de v itrification on the pitting corrosion beha v ior of Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 alloys were in v estigated in nearneutral NaCl solution.

## 1.2. Physical metallurgy and thermal stability

It has been well established that a limitation of older as well as recently disco v ered Al-base metallic glasses is that they exist in a metastable form [1  /6]. At room temperature the amorphous phase of Al-based glasses has been shown to be stable for up to 2 years [3]. Howe v er, such alloys tend to crystallize if heated with

<!-- image -->

Electrochimica Acta 48 (2003) 1223  /1234

<!-- image -->

www.else v ier.com/locate/electacta

## Localized corrosion of Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 alloys in the amorphous, nanocrystalline and crystalline states: resistance to micrometer-scale pit formation

J.E. Sweitzer, G.J. Shiflet, John R. Scully *

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Uni v ersity of Virginia, Charlottes v ille, VA 22904-4745, USA

sufficient thermal energy to accelerate the kinetics of crystallization, nucleation and growth [3,6]. During a low temperature heat treatment, such homogeneous single phase amorphous alloys can transform into a nanocrystalline composite with the remaining amorphous phase as the matrix. Upon further heating, this amorphous/nanocrystalline composite microstructure then transforms into a fully crystalline state with the formation of transitional or equilibrium phases [2  / 4]. It is interesting to note that as-spun Al-base amorphous alloys and nanocrystalline composites exhibit impro v ed mechanical properties. Hono [7] has reported tensile strengths of 800 MPa for aluminum-based alloys in the amorphous state and as high as 1500 MPa in a partially crystalline state after isothermal heat treatment. In contrast, the tensile strength of 99.99% pure Al is 45 MPa and that of 2024-T3 is 485 MPa [8].

Using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), Goyal et al. [4] reported that all of the Al  /Ni  /Y alloy systems studied containing ] /80 at.% Al had a four stage crystallization process and the resulting phases were identified using X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. During the first stage indicated by an exothermic peak at 576 K, supersaturated a -Al precipitates formed in the amorphous matrix by a primary crystallization process. In the second stage (612 K), the remaining amorphous phase transformed eutectically into a -Al and Al3Y. Stage three (655 K) can be thought of as the solid state precipitation of the ternary AlNiY phase from saturated a -Al. This ternary phase, being metastable, transforms into Al3Y and Al3Ni in the fourth stage (748 K), yielding equilibrium phases. Kwong et al. [5] and Cao et al. [1] reported a v ery similar crystallization sequence for Al  /Ni  /Y alloys with ] /85 at.% Al.

Csontos [3] also found that the Al90Fe5Gd5 alloy had a three stage crystallization process. Microstructure changes were reported to occur at each transition temperature. The first exothermic peak (473 K) indicates the primary crystallization of a homogeneously dispersed, roughly spherical nanocrystalline phase embedded in the amorphous matrix. The second exotherm (663 K) indicates the transformation of the nanocrystals into lower energy metastable transition phases. These metastable transition phases transform into equilibrium phases of different compositions during the third exotherm temperature (753 K). Solute partitioning has been reported in the partially crystallized state containing a -Al nanocrystals embedded in an amorphous matrix [3,7,9  / 11]. Transition metal (TM) and rare earth elements (RE) are rejected from the a -Al phase due to the low solubility of these elements in fcc aluminum [8]. The concentration of RE at the interface of the a -Al nanocrystal is higher than the bulk composition while there is a general increase abo v e the bulk concentration for TM in the amorphous matrix away from the interfacial region [3,9,11]. The increased concentration of RE at the interface and subsequent concentration gradient away from the nanocrystal suggests that the RE diffuses more slowly than the TM, most likely due to its larger atomic radii [3,7,9  / 11].

A25 h heat treatment at 150 8 C was used in this study to obtain a partially crystallized state containing -/10 nm nanocrystals embedded in a remaining amorphous matrix, hereafter referred to as the nanocrystalline state. The v olume fraction of precipitates can be as high as 40  /50%, The measured concentrations of Al, Fe, and Gd in the nanocrystal was 95, 3 and B /2 at.%, respecti v ely [3]. The Al concentration decreased to almost 87 at.% in the amorphous matrix, and approached the bulk concentration well into the matrix. A general build up of TM in the amorphous matrix to 7 at.% was obser v ed, while a concentration gradient occurs for the rare earth element from the interface to the matrix. The RE maximum was 7 at.% at the nanocrystal/matrix interface and decreased to a concentration just below the bulk concentration in the matrix. This beha v ior has also been reported for other Al  /TM  / RE alloy systems [7,9,10].

Performing a higher temperature heat treatment resulted in a fully crystalline microstructure with solute additions collected in equilibrium, intermetallic phases at the grain boundaries such as Al3(Ni,Y) [2,4], Al2(Ni,Y) and AlY2 [2], Al2(Fe,Gd) [12] and Al4Gd [3]. Csontos [3] found that nanocrystallization of Al90Fe5Gd5 could be obser v ed at temperatures as low as 100 8 C but not at temperatures abo v e 400 8 C. Abo v e this temperature, the nanocrystallization kinetics were so rapid that the transformation was bypassed in fa v or of the formation of transition/equilibrium phases. At a temperature of 550 8 C, the microstructure of the amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 alloy became fully crystalline within 1 min and continual grain growth occurred with increasing annealing time. Similar kinetics was obser v ed for the Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 alloy as well.

## 1.3. Corrosion properties and objecti v e

Amorphous Al  /TM  /RE alloys ha v e excellent corrosion resistance [2,6,12,14,15]. The mechanisms of the impro v ed corrosion resistance of metallic glasses are related to amorphous structure [14,16] and/or alloying additions in supersaturated solid solution [6,12,17  / 21]. Pitting of polycrystalline high purity aluminum and precipitation of age hardened aluminum alloys is commonly initiated at precipitate phases, constituent particles and grain boundaries [22  /32]. Homoand heterophase grain boundaries in crystalline alloys are areas of high local stresses, impurity segregation, precipitation and nanochemical heterogeneity that promote preferential nucleation of pits [22  /25,27  / 30]. The amorphous structure eliminates microstructural heterogeneities as sites of localized corrosion initiation and

accelerated attack [12,14,16,33,34]. Alloy additions may further impro v e resistance to localized corrosion by forming an impro v ed passi v e film [2,18,19,33  / 39], changing the kinetics of dissolution at localized sites [20], or both. A more protecti v e film may form on an amorphous material that is enriched in oxidized solute, with effects including hindering the migration of Cl ions through the film [18,19]. Alloy additions also reduce the ability of pits to dissol v e at a sufficient rate and supply acidity v ia cation hydrolysis to maintain the critical local en v ironment necessary for pit growth [20,21]. Howe v er, little is known about the corrosion properties of Al-base amorphous alloys in v arious states of de v itrification. All of the benefits cited abo v e could potentially be lost after the formation of crystals with the structure and composition of the sol v ent element (e.g. fcc aluminum). An important question is whether the formation of Al-rich nanocrystals in an amorphous matrix leads to a loss in the resistance to formation of micrometer scale pits. The objecti v e of this paper is to in v estigate the ability of partially de v itrified Al  /Ni  /Y and Al  /Fe  /Gd alloys to resist formation of micrometer scale pits.

## 2. Experimental procedures

## 2.1. Materials

Two ternary Al  /TM  /RE metallic glass alloys, Al  / Ni  /Y and Al  /Fe  /Gd, were in v estigated. In particular, the compositions included Al87Ni8.7Y4.3, Al85Ni10Y5, and Al85Ni5Y10 from the Al  /Ni  /Y family and Al85Fe7Gd8, Al90Fe4.5Gd5.5, and Al90Fe5Gd5 from the Al  / Fe  /Gd family. Preliminary testing o v er these ranges of TM and RE compositions in se v eral different aqueous en v ironments re v ealed negligible differences in corrosion beha v ior in this range. Two alloys, Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5, were emphasized for more in-depth characterization and crystallization studies. Al  /Ni  /Y and Al  /Fe  /Gd alloys were fabricated using a single roller melt technique. Ingots of composition Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 were produced by arc-melting elemental chips under an argon atmosphere. The purity of Al, Y, and Gd was 99.9%, Fe was 99.98%, and that of Ni was 99.99%. The metallic glass ribbons were prepared in a helium atmosphere using a 0.20 m diameter copper wheel with an approximate circumferential v elocity of 45 m s 1 . The ribbons were formed with dimensions of 15  /20 m m thick, 1  /2 mm wide and up to se v eral meters in length [9]. The as-spun ribbons were confirmed to possess a wholly amorphous structure using v arious techniques including X-ray and electron diffraction, dark field transmission electron microscopy (DFTEM), and high resolution electron microscopy [3]. High purity (99.999%) polycrystalline aluminum foils of the same dimensions as the metallic glass ribbons were tested for comparison. The Al foils were manufactured to dimensions of 2.5 /2.5 cm and 20 m m thick and cut into -/1.4 mm /2.5 cm /20 m m segments, similar to the dimensions of spun-melt ribbons.

## 2.2. Heat treatments

Amorphous spun-melt ribbons were encapsulated in Pyrex or quartz tubes that were back-filled with argon gas. To partially crystallize the ribbons to form nanocrystals, the encapsulated samples were isothermally heat treated at 150 8 C for 25 h in a Precision † Gra v ity Con v ection O v en Model 16EG. A dark field transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of the Al90Fe5Gd5 alloy in the nanocrystalline state is shown in Fig. 1(a). A fully crystallized condition (Fig. 1(b)) was achie v ed by heat treating for 1 h at 550 8 C in a Thermolyne † 480 000 furnace. Samples were allowed to air cool following their respecti v e heat treatments. A TEM micrograph of crystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 used in this study is shown in Fig. 1(b) after a 1 h isothermal heat treatment at 550 8 C. The microstructure consists of Al grains with equilibrium intermetallic phases at the grain boundaries. The grain size is approximately 400  /600 nm. A TEM micrograph of the 99.999% pure polycrystalline Al foil is shown in Fig. 2. The grain size of high purity Al was approximately 10  /80 m min the short trans v erse direction of the sheet. Grains were elongated in the rolling direction [13,40].

## 2.3. Electrochemical testing

Alloy ribbon and Al foil samples were mounted on end in Buehlcr † Epoxide resin exposing a surface area of -/2 /10 4 cm 2 consisting of the foil cross-section (e.g. short trans v erse by long trans v erse surface of Al foil). These electrodes will be referred to as micro-band (mb) electrodes. This brand of epoxy was chosen, particularly for the metastable alloys, because it is a cold mounting compound. During curing the resin is reported to ha v e a peak temperature of only 28 8 C (82 8 F) which was below the temperature associated with nanocrystal formation e v en at long times. Mounted samples were wet polished through 600 grit SiC paper. Final surface preparation included a successi v e polish to a 0.05 m m finish in alumina suspensions. Complementary free standing (fs) electrodes with a larger exposed area, -/10 1 cm 2 , were also tested to in v estigate the effects of surface area on critical potentials. The only surface preparation for these electrodes was a methanol rinse. The fs electrode exposes the as-spun metal ribbon, which has been shown to ha v e less micro-scale roughness than a polished microelectrode when expressed as root mean square (RMS) a v erage roughness o v er se v eral surface profiles using atomic force microscopy. The

<!-- image -->

200nm

Fig. 1. Dark field TEM image of nanocrystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 obtained by heat treating an amorphous ribbon at 150 8 C for 25 h (a) and bright field transmission electron microscope image of crystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 obtained by heat treating an amorphous ribbon at 550 8 C for 1 h (b) [3].

Fig. 2. Dark field transmission electron micrograph of pure polycrystalline Al foil.

<!-- image -->

polished surface (0.05 m m finish) had an a v erage RMS roughness of 124 A ˚ for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 while the as-spun materials had an a v erage RMSroughness of 36.3 A ˚ 1 on the side of the ribbon that contacted the wheel and an a v erage RMS roughness of 21.5 A ˚ on the opposite side. This issue will be discussed later when addressing pit stabilization potentials for the microand freestanding electrodes since a rougher surface will typically form stable pits more easily [41].

The working electrodes were tested using a 300 ml electrochemical flat cell equipped with a platinum mesh counter electrode, gas inlet and outlet ports, and a reference electrode port. All potentials were measured v ersus a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) scale with accuracy of 9 /2 mV. A 0.6 M (3.5 wt.%) NaCl electrolyte was prepared using deionized water of 18 M V cm resisti v ity and ACS certified reagents. This electrolyte was deaerated with N2 gas and the open circuit potential was measured for approximately 1 h followed by an anodic scan at 0.1 mV s 1 , and a re v erse

1 It should be noted that AFM roughness measurements report only the small-scale roughness. Both faces of the as-spun ribbon possess other large, far spaced features such as broad ridges and ripples that may be obser v ed through optical microscopy. These features were not present in the mb electrodes and the pure aluminum fs electrodes.

<!-- image -->

Riar(VVs.SCL)

Fig. 3. (a) E  /log i beha v ior showing the determination of E pit and E rp from an anodic potentiodynamic polarization experiment for pure Al. Electrode area is 10 4 cm 2 . The arrows show the direction of the potential scan. (b) Example of stable pit formed in polycrystalline Al after E  /log( i ) scan to determine E rp .

<!-- image -->

in scan direction at 0.05 mA. A PAR Model 273A or Model 283 potentiostat under computer control was utilized with CorrWare TM corrosion measurement software. E pit was taken at the potential at which the current density, current normalized to total exposed area, reached a v alue two orders of magnitude higher than the passi v e current density, i pass, which ranged from 1 to 5 m A cm 2 . These parameters are clearly seen in the E  / log i diagram for a high purity aluminum microelec- b)

1Hour

trode (Fig. 3(a)). E rp was taken as the potential where a distinct change in slope and characteristic shape of the re v erse potentiodynamic scan was seen. E pit and E rp reflected micrometer scale pit formation and repassi v ation, respecti v ely (Fig. 3(b)). Cumulati v e probability distribution plots were constructed from E rp and E pit data to compare the critical potential distributions for the amorphous, nanocrystalline, and crystalline alloys to pure polycrystalline aluminum foils. The sur v i v al probability P s, defined as n / N  /1 where n is the number of specimens sur v i v ing, i.e. not undergoing pit stabilization at applied potential E N n and N is the total number of specimens in the test population, was also used to compare the localized corrosion beha v ior of the alloys [42]. Pit depths on the mb electrodes were estimated at the end of E  / I scans using Faraday's law assuming a single pit since the entire surface area of the electrode was obser v ed to be recessed 2 . The actual pit depths were measured from sectioned electrodes. Scanning electron microscopy was used to measure the pit diameters of the fs electrodes.

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Critical potentials associated with micrometer-scale pitting

More positi v e mean v alues for E pit and E rp were achie v ed for amorphous and nanocrystalline Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 compared with that of pure polycrystalline Al as well as crystalline Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 (Table 1). The alloys lost their impro v ed localized corrosion resistance in the fully crystalline state as indicated by similar v alues for E pit and E rp for the fully crystallized alloys and Al. No significant changes were seen in the passi v e current density and correlations between E pit and i pass were not obtained for any of the alloys.

The v alues of E pit and to a lesser extent E rp were found to v ary o v er successi v e measurements under each condition. The distributions are more e v ident on a cumulati v e probability plot. Fig. 4(a) shows the cumulati v e probability distribution for E corr , E pit and E rp for pure Al in the mb electrode configuration. It shows the probability of obtaining a critical potential at or below the v alue on the x -axis. The median E pit v alue for pure Al in the mb configuration was /0.348 V, which is ele v ated abo v e reported E pit v alues for pure Al in 0.6 M NaCl. Howe v er, there is a finite probability that E pit was as low as E rp. Moreo v er, the mean E pit and E rp v alues

2 The measured current underestimates the true anodic current due to H2 e v olution in pits. Consequently the pit depths calculated using Faraday's law are underestimates of actual depth.

Table 1 Mean v alues of critical potential ranges (V v s. SCE) reported for indicated materials at the 99% confidence le v el

| Material           | E pit (V SCE )    | E rp (V SCE )     |
|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Pure Al            |                   |                   |
| Free standing a    | / 0.650 9 / 0.034 | / 0.806 9 / 0.033 |
| Microelectrode     | / 0.376 9 / 0.113 | / 0.754 9 / 0.009 |
| Amorphous b        |                   |                   |
| Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 | / 0.237 9 / 0.030 | / 0.358 9 / 0.011 |
| Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5    | / 0.099 9 / 0.093 | / 0.304 9 / 0.007 |
| Nanocrystalline    |                   |                   |
| Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 | / 0.133 9 / 0.167 | / 0.371 9 / 0.018 |
| Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5    | / 0.044 9 / 0.130 | / 0.334 9 / 0.009 |
| Fully crystalline  |                   |                   |
| Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 | / 0.143 9 / 0.194 | / 0.760 9 / 0.008 |
| Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5    | / 0.499 9 / 0.163 | / 0.798 9 / 0.006 |

Results reported for alloys are from mb electrodes.

- a Free standing electrode surface area is 10 1 cm 2 .

b Microelectrode surface area is 10 4 cm 2 .

for the larger surface area, fs electrodes, /0.650 and / 0.806 V, respecti v ely, are in good agreement with the published v alues for these conditions using large electrodes [18  /20,43,44]. The mean v alue of E rp for pure Al in the mb electrode configuration was /0.754 V and was quite reproducible as indicated by the steep slope on the cumulati v e probability distribution plot.

Fig. 4(b) shows the cumulati v e probability distribution for E corr , E pit and E rp for Al90Fe5Gd5 in the mb electrode configuration. It is interesting to note that E pit and E rp are ele v ated compared with Al while E corr remains near /1 V. To compare all alloys to Al, E rp was used due to its tight statistical distribution and lack of dependence on electrode surface area. The cumulati v e probability distributions in Figs. 5 and 6 clearly demonstrate the enhancement of E rp for both the amorphous and nanocrystalline states in both alloys. Fig. 5 shows the cumulati v e probability of obtaining a gi v en repassi v ation potential for pure Al compared with amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5. E rp for both amorphous alloys is approximately 400 mV more positi v e than that of pure Al. Fig. 5 also shows that the beha v ior for Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 are similar. For this reason the next series of plots will focus only on Al90Fe5Gd5.

Fig. 6 shows the Erp distributions for the amorphous, nanocrystalline and fully crystalline states of Al90Fe5Gd5 in comparison to pure polycrystalline Al. Upon repassi v ation, the a v erage pit size is large (  / 100 m m), therefore, the repassi v ation potentials were associated with pits that included considerable area fractions of the remaining amorphous matrix and many nanocrystals when tested in the nanocrystalline condition. That is to say that repassi v ated pits are much larger than the size of indi v idual nanocrystals. Notably,

Fig. 4. (a) Cumulati v e probability plot of E corr , E pit, and E rp for high purity polycrystalline Al mb electrode (surface area of 10 4 cm 2 ) in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl. (b) Cumulati v e probability plot of E corr , E pit, and E rp for Al90Fe5Gd5 mb electrode (surface area of 10 4 cm 2 ) in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Cumulati v e probability plot of E rp for pure Al and amorphous alloy mb electrodes (surface area of 10 4 cm 2 ) in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl showing the impro v ed pit corrosion resistance of both amorphous alloys.

<!-- image -->

the nanocrystalline alloy retained the impro v ed resistance to micrometer size pit stabilization that was seen for the amorphous alloy as e v ident from similar v alues for E rp for the amorphous and nanocrystalline conditions (Fig. 6). The median v alues for E rp for the nanocrystalline materials were v ery similar to those of their amorphous counterparts and were enhanced as compared with the crystalline materials. The E rp distribution for the crystalline state of Al90Fe5Gd5, also plotted in Fig. 6, shows that the median E rp v alue decreased o v er 400 mV to a v alue that is actually slightly less than that of pure polycrystalline Al. This was seen for both alloys in the fully crystalline state (Table 1). Pit growth tests for the crystalline alloys suggest that repassi v ation is not by non-maintenance of the critical depassi v ating en v ironment owing to slow pit dissolution but by H  consumption and OH production since

Fig. 6. Cumulati v e probability plot of E rp v alues for amorphous, nanocrystalline, and crystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 mb electrodes (surface area of 10 4 cm 2 ) in comparison to pure Al in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl.

<!-- image -->

repassi v ation did not occur until the onset of net cathodic kinetics during downward potential stepping. Intermetallics in the fully crystalline alloys were obser v ed to increase the rate of the cathodic reaction that occurred within pits. Despite this, E rp still occurred at quite negati v e potentials suggesting that modest acidity was capable of maintaining pit growth. In contrast, repassi v ation of the amorphous and nanocrystalline alloys occurred by dilution of the critical depassi v ating en v ironment and onset of repassi v ation as dissolution kinetics slowed in pits. This was indicated by an abrupt drop in anodic current towards passi v e current densities during downward potential stepping. This indicated the requirement for a v ery se v ere pit chemistry in order to maintain acid pitting in such amorphous and amorphous/nanocrystalline alloys.

Fig. 7 shows the sur v i v al probability, P s , v ersus potential for Al90Fe5Cd5. The probability of pit stabi-

Fig. 7. Sur v i v al probabilities with respect to stable pitting as a function of electrode potential for amorphous, nanocrystalline, and crystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 in comparison to high purity, polycrystalline Al in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl (mb electrode).

<!-- image -->

lization (1 / P s) is greater at more negati v e potentials for the fully crystalline condition compared with the nanocrystalline alloy. In general, the fully crystalline materials indicate a greater probability of stable pitting at a lower potential, while the amorphous and nanocrystalline alloys would ha v e to be exposed to a much higher potential to achie v e the same probability of stable pit formation. Interestingly, nanocrystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 had the lowest probability of breakdown and stabilization of micrometer scale pits 3 compared with amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5. The crystalline alloy had a lower probability of sur v i v ing compared with pure Al specimens. The explanation for this beha v ior is likely linked to the microstructural differences between the two samples.

## 3.2. Insight on spacing of critical flaws

A tight statistical distribution for E rp was always obser v ed regardless of electrode size for pure polycrystalline Al as well as for both alloys. Moreo v er, small Al mb electrodes exhibited E rp v alues that were similar to those on large fs electrodes (Table 1). In contrast, the statistical distribution in E pit was always larger (Fig. 4(a and b), Table 1) in studies using small surface area mb electrodes compared with larger surface area fs electrodes. Median E pit was ele v ated abo v e expected v alues for the crystalline Al mb electrodes when compared with large fs crystalline Al electrodes. Larger statistical distributions in E pit were also seen in the cumulati v e probability plots for the alloys in the fully crystalline state using the mb electrode. It is reasonable to speculate

3 Numerous studies show that the pitting potential is associated with stabilization of pits already formed [44,45].

that this beha v ior is due to the microstructural heterogeneity of the crystalline condition that exists on the length scale of the mb electrode surface dimensions.

The ele v ation in E pit and change in the distributions may gi v e insight on the size of the critical flaw that leads to stabilization. Fig. 8(a) shows the cumulati v e probability for achie v ing a gi v en E pit v alue in the case of mb (10 4 cm 2 ) and fs (10 1 cm 2 ) electrodes of pure Al compared with amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3. A large statistical distribution of E pit v alues was obser v ed for pure polycrystalline Al mb electrodes, while the distribution for the larger surface area fs Al electrodes was much tighter. In contrast, a tight distribution is seen for both the small mb and large free standing electrodes in the case of the amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 alloy. In other words, there is little effect of electrode size on E pit. The distribution in E pit for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 was larger and influenced more by surface area as seen in Fig. 8(b), but is still less distributed than data for polycrystalline Al. Fig. 9 summarizes the ele v ation in E pit with decreasing electrode area as a function of alloy and heat treatment. For pure Al the ele v ation in E pit for a mb is almost 300 mV; from /0.647 V, a v alue in good agreement with the literature [18  /20,43,44], to /0.350 V. The ele v ation in the mean v alues for the amorphous and nanocrystalline A87Ni8.7Y4.3 microelectrodes is relati v ely insignificant at 38 and 40 mV, respecti v ely (Fig. 9(a)). A similar trend was also found for the Al90Fe5Gd5 alloy in the amorphous and nanocrystalline states albeit with a greater ele v ation in E pit as seen in Fig. 9(b). It is interesting to note that the trend is towards greater ele v ation of E pit for small surface area crystalline compared with fully amorphous electrodes. That is to say, when the degree of m m scale microstructural heterogeneity is increased by heat treatment then small area mb electrodes produce the greatest relati v e ele v ation in E pit compared with larger electrodes.

It is interesting to note that E rp is only slightly or negligibly changed by electrode surface area. Fig. 10 v erifies the similarity of E rp for mb (10 4 cm 2 ) and fs electrodes (0.1 cm 2 ) of pure Al and amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3. The difference in median E rp v alues for mb and free standing electrodes was only -/50 mV for pure Al and -/20 mV for amorphous A87Ni8.7Y4.3. Pits of se v eral hundred micrometer diameter were repassi v ated at this critical potential (Fig. 11).

## 4. Discussion

4.1. Corrosion beha v ior as a function of the degree of crystallization

The finding that the nanocrystalline state of the Al  / TM  /RE alloys retains the corrosion resistance of their

Fig. 8. Cumulati v e probability plots of E pit v alues for amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 (a) and Al90Fe5Gd5 (b) in comparison to polycrystalline Al for large and small surface area electrodes (deaerated 0.6 M NaCl). ( m ) Free standing polycrystalline Al, ( j ) mb polycrystalline Al, ( 2 ) free standing amorphous alloy, ( ^ ) mb amorphous alloy. Free standing test surface area /10 1 cm 2 , mb area -/10 4 cm 2 .

<!-- image -->

amorphous counterparts is extremely promising for potential future applications of these high strength materials. In con v entional precipitation age hardened materials, strength must often be sacrificed for impro v ed corrosion resistance. E pit and E rp were enhanced for both the amorphous and nanocrystalline alloys as compared with their crystalline counterparts and pure polycrystalline Al (Figs. 4 and 5, Table 1). The amorphous structure of these alloys eliminates grain boundaries and second phase particles as sites of pit initiation [22  /32], while TM or RE in solid solution may impro v e the resistance to localized corrosion [2,17  / 19,33  /39,43] by enriching solute in the passi v e film [18,19,43], altering dissolution kinetics in pits [20,46,47], changing the se v erity of the critical pit solution, or helping form insoluble compounds that destabilize pit growth [21]. It is difficult to determine whether E pit data indicate that the oxide film is less prone to initiation when the metal is amorphous or that E pit is raised due to pit growth and stabilization considerations. Data suggest that the critical flaw promoting pit stabilization for the amorphous alloys may not be as prone to initiation as the critical flaw responsible for pit stabilization in fully crystalline materials and requires a more positi v e potential. Moreo v er, once a pit has been initiated in the amorphous alloys a more se v ere depassi v ating pit chemistry may be required to sustain growth. This is suggested by ele v ated E rp data.

Regarding pit initiation and growth in high strength nanocrystalline alloys, it is reasonable to assert that pits will be initiated more readily at the Al-rich fcc nanocrystals, if they lack TM or RE solute as con v entional

Fig. 9. Ele v ation in E pit gi v en by the difference in the mean v alues of E pit for microelectrodes compared with free standing electrodes. Cases shown are for amorphous and nanocrystalline Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 (a) and Al90Fe5Gd5 (b) in comparison to pure polycrystalline Al (deaerated 0.6 M NaCl).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 10. Cumulati v e probability distributions of E rp for large and small pure Al and amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 electrodes in deaerated 0.6 M NaCl demonstrating that E rp is independent of initial electrode surface area.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 11. SEM  /SEI micrograph of pit formed and repassi v ated in the amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 material using a free standing electrode.

<!-- image -->

phase equilibrium considerations suggest. Howe v er, these pits may quickly face inhibited growth due to the solid solution solute gradient that exists at the nanocrystal/amorphous matrix interface. Moreo v er, in the presence of the highly enriched solute concentration gradient at the interface, an e v en more se v ere depassiv ating pit chemistry may be required. Therefore, nanopits that reach the high TM and RE regions at the nanocrystal/amorphous interface and grow into the amorphous matrix might be expected to require much higher applied potentials than pure Al in order to achie v e and maintain stable pit growth conditions. This hypothesis will be examined in a subsequent paper focusing on artificial pit growth studies simulating the conditions for acti v e pit growth.

The fully crystalline alloys possessed slightly worse corrosion beha v ior than pure polycrystalline Al as characterized by similar v alues for E pit and E rp (Table 1, Figs. 6 and 7). The almost pure Al, crystalline matrix of the heat treated alloy, de v oid of TM and RE [2  / 4], (Fig. 4) did not retain the localized corrosion resistance exhibited by the solid solution, amorphous matrix. Grain boundaries and intermetallic phases ha v e been introduced as susceptible initiation sites [22  /32] and pit growth is no longer hindered by TM and RE in solid solution because the beneficial alloy additions ha v e been remo v ed from solid solution and collected in intermetallic compounds formed.

Two possible explanations for the finding that high purity polycrystalline Al performs slightly better than the crystalline alloys (Figs. 6 and 7) are the higher population of grain boundaries and the presence of intermetallic phases in the crystalline alloy. Fig. 1(b), Fig. 2 show micrographs of the crystalline alloy and the pure Al foil. The size of the crystalline Al90Fe5Gd5 grains is o v er 1000 times smaller than that found in the high purity polycrystalline aluminum tested here. Considering that grain boundaries are often critical flaws [28], a smaller grain size exposes more pitting initiation sites thereby degrading the corrosion resistance as compared with pure Al. Intermetallic phases may also degrade the pitting resistance of the crystalline alloys compared with pure Al as they introduce another easy pit initiation site [48,49].

## 4.2. Insight on critical flaws responsible for pit formation

The mb electrodes showed larger statistical distributions in E pit , and ele v ation in median E pit v alues especially in the case of the crystalline materials. This ele v ation in E pit is not likely due to differences in surface roughness between the microelectrodes and the free standing electrodes. Con v entional arguments suggest that stable pit formation would be an easier process on electrodes with greater surface roughness due to mass transport considerations [41,50,51]. The surface of the polished mb electrode has greater small scale roughness compared with the fs electrodes and isolated polishing scratches in mb electrodes may be as pre v alent and se v ere as ripples in fs electrodes. E pit v alues measured for amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 mb electrodes were not ele v ated compared with the fs electrode (Fig. 8(a) and Fig. 9(a)). This effect is demonstrated by plotting the difference between the median v alues of E pit for the mb electrodes and the fs electrodes for pure Al, amorphous and nanocrystalline Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and Al90Fe5Gd5 in Fig. 9(a) and (b). One hypothesis links the ele v ation in the E pit to differences in the structure between pure Al, the amorphous and the nanocrystalline alloys. The premise here is that by decreasing the electrode size to dimensions on the order of the spacing of the critical flaws that promote pit initiation and stabilization, then the total number of flaws on the at-risk exposed surface decreases. This may raise E pit in a gi v en upward scan because the possibility exists that some specimens will

contain fewer flaws [52]. A greater probability of missing such a defect in the exposed 'at-risk' surface of a small electrode also creates the possibility of large data scatter due to specimen-to-specimen v ariation in defects. Con v ersely, if enough small electrodes are tested then there is a finite probability that some of the small electrodes will contain a fatal flaw and the foot of the cumulati v e probability plot for small electrodes will present data similar to that of large electrodes as seen in Fig. 8. This was also obser v ed during pitting in stainless steel with MnS inclusions and AA 2024-T3 containing S-Al2CuMg constituent particles, both well known pit sites [52,53]. Fig. 2 shows a TEM micrograph of the pure Al foil. The grain size is about 10  /80 m m, which is on the order of the thickness of the Al mb electrode. Considering that grain boundaries are a likely critical site for pit initiation, E pit, would be ele v ated because the a v erage number of exposed grains would be decreased from the order of 10 3 for a fs electrode (0.1 cm 2 ) to 10 1 for a mb (10 4 cm 2 ) as seen in Fig. 9. Similar arguments can be expressed regarding intermetallic particle spacing and large surface scratches or ridges in splat cooled ribbons if these sites control pit initiation.

The ele v ation in E pit for the amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 mb electrodes (Fig. 8(a)) were insignificant compared with the fs electrode. This suggests that critical depassiv ating flaw, although more benign than grain boundaries or intermetallics, is far more closely spaced than any spacing on the order of the electrode dimensions. It is reasonable to speculate that as the electrode size is decreased to mb electrode dimensions, an ample population of these unknown critical flaws is still present on the amorphous surface. Therefore, E pit is not affected. Consequently, E pit does not change o v er the range of electrode surface areas explored. For amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 (Fig. 8(b)), a significant ele v ation in E pit was found for mb electrodes for reasons not yet understood. The ele v ation in E pit for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 micro- electrodes is most likely not due to inhomogeneities in the bulk material since TEM studies show a completely homogeneous matrix [2,3,9,11]. One hypothesis to explain this higher de v iation and scatter in E pit for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 mb electrodes compared with amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 mb electrodes is the differences in surface morphology. Very different surface morphologies ha v e been disco v ered on the as-spun ribbons as seen in Fig. 12(a) and (b). The images in Fig. 12(a) and (b) are of the side of the ribbon not in contact with the rotating wheel during the melt-spinning process. Both sides are exposed during testing of fs electrodes. The side in contact with the wheel has been shown to be similar for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 and Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 and is v ery smooth except for large ridges. Fig. 12(a) shows the featureless, smooth surface for amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5. If the critical flaw for an amorphous material is v isible using AFM, this image would indicate that the spacing of a critical flaw is on the order of the dimensions of a microelectrode, thereby explaining the ele v ation in E pit for this case. Fig. 12(b) shows the dominant surface morphology for amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3. Surface inhomogeneities in the form of hemispherical roughness are present and are closely spaced compared with the microelectrode dimensions. If these inhomogeneities are critical flaws, Fig. 12(b) explains the tight statistical distribution and lack of E pit ele v ation for amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 in the mb electrode configuration since both the surface area of large fs as well as the small mb electrode would contain many of these surface flaws.

## 4.3. Insight on reproducibility and similarity of Erp

E rp was independent of initial electrode surface area (Table 1 and Fig. 10) and the population of small initiation sites exposed on a polished surface. Howe v er, E rp is likely dependent on the depth of the largest pit

Fig. 12. Atomic force microscope images of the surface morphologies of as-spun amorphous Al90Fe5Gd5 (a) and amorphous Al87Ni8.7Y4.3 (b).

<!-- image -->

[54]. The reproducibility of E rp suggests that pits of similar depths were repassi v ated on all electrodes. The pit depths of pure Al microelectrodes subjected to anodic polarization were determined from anodic charge to be 538 m m (650 m m actual) while the pit diameter obser v ed on fs electrodes was obser v ed to be approximately 479 m m (Fig. 3(b)). The pit depths of amorphous Al87Ni87Y4.3 mb electrodes were 223 m m (315 m m actual), while the pit diameter obser v ed on a fs electrode 308 m m (Fig. 11). Hence, similar pit depths are found on all electrodes and similar E rp should be expected despite different electrode surface areas [54]. Therefore, changes in E rp as a function of alloy and heat treatment likely reflect intrinsic material differences and reflect the critical pit chemistry required for pit stabilization [55], not differences in geometric conditions affecting mass transport properties that likely go v ern repassi v ation by the acid pitting mechanism [54].

## 5. Conclusions

- 1) Solid solution TM and/or RE alloy additions as well as the amorphous structure of the as-solidified Al  / Fe  /Gd and Al  /Ni  /Y alloys significantly enhances E rp compared with polycrystalline Al suggesting that these materials are more resistant to corrosion damage caused by the growth of micrometer scale pits.
- 2) The nanocrystalline alloys retained the pit corrosion resistance of the amorphous alloys as indicated by retention of ele v ated E rp e v en when 10  /15 nm nanocrystals are embedded in the amorphous matrix.
- 3) Complete crystallization, in v ol v ing depletion of TM and RE formerly in solid solution and the formation of intermetallic phases, degrades the corrosion resistance of the Al  /TM  /RE alloys as characterized by lower v alues of E pit and E rp compared with the fully amorphous condition and critical potentials similar to polycrystalline Al.
- 4) E rp was v ery reproducible in both large (0.1 cm 2 ) and small (10 4 cm 2 ) electrodes owing to formation and repassi v ation of similar sized pits in both large and small electrodes. Therefore, differences in E rp as a function of alloy heat treatment reflect intrinsic differences and differences in critical pit chemistries, not alteration of geometric conditions that might affect the mass transport factors go v erning pit repassi v ation.
- 5) The spacing, population and identity of critical flaws compared with the electrode test area ha v e a significant effect on the v alue and the v ariability of E pit. This study suggests that the critical depassi v ating flaw for the amorphous material is not only more benign but smaller and more finely spaced

than the proposed critical flaws, grain boundaries and second phase particles in the fully crystalline materials.

## Acknowledgements

A multi-uni v ersity research initiati v e (Grant No. F49602-01-1-0352) entitled 'The de v elopment of an en v ironmentally compliant multifunctional coating for aerospace applications using molecular and nano-engineering methods' under the direction of Lt. Col. Paul C. Trulo v e at AFOSR partially supported this study while the remainder of the support was from the National Science Foundation (DMR-0204840). Electrochemical instrumentation and software in the Center for Electrochemical Science and Engineering are supported by EG&amp;G Instruments and Scribner Associates, Inc.

## References

- [1] B. Cao, S. Li, D. Yi, J. Less Common Met. 171 (1991) 1.
- [2] R. Chmielewski, R. Sodhi, S.J. Thorpe, Corrosion, Electrochemistry, and Catalysis of Metastable Metals and Intermetallics, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ, 1993, p. 84.
- [3] A.A. Csontos, Phase transformations in Al-based metallic glasses, M.S. thesis, Uni v ersity of Virginia, Charlottes v ille, VA, 1996.
- [4] A. Goyal, B.S. Murty, S. Ranganathan, J. Mater. Sci. 28 (1993) 6091.
- [5] V. Kwong, Y.C. Koo, S.J. Thorpe, T. Aust, Acta Metall. Mater. 39 (7) (1991) 1563.
- [6] G.J. Shiflet, Glassy metals, in: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, Wiley, 1994, p. 656.
- [7] K. Hono, Y. Zhang, A. Inoue, T. Sakurai, Mater. Trans. JIM 36 (7) (1995) 909.
- [8] J.R. Da v is, Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1993, p. 784.
- [9] A. Csontos, G. Shiflet, Nanostruct. Mater. 9 (1997) 281.
- [10] K. Hono, Y. Zang, A.P. Tsai, A. Inoue, T. Sakurai, Scr. Metall. Mater. 32 (2) (1995) 191.
- [11] A. Csontos, G. Shiflet, in: E. Ma, B. Fultz, R. Shell, J. Morral, P. Nash (Eds.), Chem. Phys. Nanostruc. Related Non-Equil. Mater, TMS-AIME, Warrendale, PA, 1997, pp. 13  /22.
- [12] R.G. Buehheit, G.E. Stoner, G.J. Shiflet, The Application of Surface Analysis Methods to En v ironmental Material Interactions, vols. PV 91-7, The Electrochemical Society, 1990, p. 490.
- [13] R. Bley, J. Hsu, J.R. Scully, Philos. Mag. Lett. 80 (2) (2000) 85.
- [14] M.D. Archer, C.C. Corke, B.H. Harji, Electrochim. Acta 32 (1) (1987) 13.
- [15] H.S. Chen, Metallic glasses update, in: Micromechanics of Ad v anced Materials, TMS, Murray Hill, NJ, 1995.
- [16] Z. Szklarska-Smialowska, Pitting Corrosion of Metals, NACE, Houston, TX, 1986, p. 431.
- [17] G.S. Frankel, M.A. Russak, C.V. Jahnes, M. Mirzamaani, V.A. Brusic, J. Electrochem. Soc. 136 (4) (1989) 1243.
- [18] W.C. Moshier, G.D. Da v is, J.S. Ahearn, H.F. Hough, J. Electrochem. Soc. 134 (11) (1987) 2677.
- [19] B.A. Shaw, G.D. Da v is, T.L. Fritz, B.J. Rees, J. Electrochem. Soc. 138 (11) (1991) 3288.
- [20] G.S. Frankel, R.C. Newman, C.V. Jahnes, M.A. Russak, J. Electrochem. Soc. 140 (1993) 2193.

- [21] Z. Szklarska-Smialowska, Corros. Sci. 33 (1992) 1193.
- [22] M.S. Hunter, G.R. Frunk, D.L. Robinson, Second International Congress on Metal Corrosion, NACE, Houston, TX, 1963.
- [23] I.L. Muller, J.R. Gal v ele, Corros. Sci. 17 (1977) 179.
- [24] A. Garner, D. Tromans, Corrosion 35 (2) (1979) 55.
- [25] K. Urushino, K. Sugimoto, Corros. Sci. 19 (1979) 225.
- [26] R.G. Buchheit, R.P. Grant, P.F. Hla v a, B. McKenzie, G.L. Zender, J. Electrochem. Soc. 144 (8) (1997) 2621.
- [27] N.D. Tomasho v , G.P. Cherno v a, N. Marko v a, Corrosion 20 (5) (1964) 166t.
- [28] Z. Szklarska-Smialowska, M. Janik-Czachor, Corros. Sci. 7 (1967) 65.
- [29] N.D. Tomasho v , G.P. Cherno v a, N. Marko v a, Zaschita Metallo v 6 (1970) 21.

[30]

E. Brauns, W. Sehwenk, Eisenhuettenw 22 (1961) 387.

- [31] J.R. Scully, D.E. Peebles, A.D. Romig, D.R. Frear, C.R. Hills, Metall. Trans. 23A (1992) 2641.
- [32] G.S. Chen, M. Gao, R.P. Wei, Corrosion 52 (1) (1996) 8.
- [33] A. Mansour, C. Melendres, J. Electrochem. Soc. 142 (6) (1995) 1961.
- [34] A.N. Mansour, C.A. Melendres, S.J. Poon, Y. He, G.J. Shiflet, J. Electrochem. Soc. 143 (2) (1996) 614.
- [35] A.N. Mansour, A.N. Mansour, C.A. Melendres, M. Pankuch, S.J. Poon, Y. He, G.J. Shiflet, Surf. Sci. Spectra 2 (3) (1993) 184  / 194.
- [36] A.N. Mansour, S.J. Poon, Y. He, G.J. Shiflet, Surf. Sci. Spectra 2 (1) (1993) 31.
- [37] H.J. Lee, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki, A. Kawashima, K. Asami, K. Hashimoto, Corros. Sci. 38 (8) (1996) 1269.
- [38] S. Virtanen, H. Bo ¨hni, Corros. Sci. 35 (1  /4) (1993) 27.
- [39] H. Habazaki, A. Kawashima, K. Asami, K. Hashimoto, The Application of Surface Analysis Methods to En v ironmental/ Material Interactions, vols. PV 91-7, The Electrochemical Society, 1990, p. 467.
- [40] J.F. Shackelford, Introduction to Material Science for Engineering, 4th ed, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle Ri v er, NJ, 1996, p. 239.
- [41] G.T. Burstein, P.C. Pistorius, Corrosion 51 (5) (1995) 380.
- [42] T. Shibata, T. Takeyama, Corrosion 33 (1997) 243.
- [43] G.D. Da v is, B.A. Shaw, B.J. Rees, M. Ferry, J. Electrochem. Soc. 140 (4) (1993) 951.
- [44] S.T. Pride, J.R. Scully, J.L. Hudson, J. Electrochem. Soc. 141 (11) (1994) 3028.
- [45] P.C. Pistorius, G.T. Burstein, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London A341 (1992) 531.
- [46] R.C. Newman, Corros. Sci. 25 (5) (1985) 341.
- [47] G.S. Frankel, Corros. Sci. 30 (1990) 1203.
- [48] A.P. Bond, G.F. Bulling, H.A. Domain, H. Billom, J. Electrochem. Soc. 13 (1996) 773.
- [49] C.A. Gehring, M.H. Peterson, Corrosion 37 (4) (1981) 232.
- [50] D.E. Williams, C. Westcott, H. Fleischmann, J. Electrochem. Soc. 132 (8) (1985) 1796.
- [51] P.E. Manning, D.J. Duquette, W.F. Sa v age, Corrosion 35 (1979) 151.
- [52] G.O. Ile v bare, G.T. Burstein, Corros. Sci. 38 (12) (1996) 2257.
- [53] T. Suter, R.C. Alkire, J. Electrochem. Soc. 148 (1) (2001) B36  / B42.
- [54] G.S. Frankel, J.R. Scully, C.V. Jahnes, J. Electrochem. Soc. 143 (1996) 1834.
- [55] J.E. Sweitzer, J.R. Scully, R.A. Bley, J.W.P. Hsu, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 2 (6) (1999) 267.