## Nanocrystalline Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 and Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 Alloys that Retain the Localized Corrosion Resistance of the Amorphous State

J. E. Sweitzer, a,* J. R. Scully, a,*,z R. A. Bley, b and J. W. P. Hsu b a Department of Materials Science and Engineering and  b Department of Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22903-2442, USA

The localized corrosion properties of Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 and Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 , were investigated in the amorphous, high strength partially nanocrystalline, and fully crystalline states. The critical pitting potentials and pit growth behaviors of amorphous and nanocrystalline alloys were improved compared to high purity, polycrystalline Al in 0.6 M NaCl solution. Transition metal (TM) and rare earth additions (RE) were retained in solid solution in amorphous alloys and the remaining amorphous matrix of partially nanocrystalline alloys. Substantial TM and RE solute rejection occurred from nano- and microcrystals. Notably, the improved resistance to pitting was retained in the partially nanocrystalline condition, but was completely lost in the fully crystalline alloys. The opportunity exists to create partially nanocrystalline Al-TM-RE alloys of great strength with corrosion resistance equal to their amorphous counterparts.

© 1999 The Electrochemical Society. S1099-0062(99)02-016-7. All rights reserved.

Manuscript received February 2, 1999. Available electronically March 18, 1999.

It is well established in the literature that glassy alloys and alloys with a low degree of crystallinity offer superior resistance to corrosion and vastly improved mechanical properties over their conventional counterparts. 1,2 Amorphous alloys often have corrosion resistance  one  to  two  orders  of  magnitude  greater  than  polycrystalline alloys  with  the  same  alloy  composition. 1,2 One  theory  links  the improved resistance of amorphous alloys to their ability to promote amorphous  oxide  formation.  In  high  temperature  gas, vitreous  or amorphous  oxides  offer  improved  oxidation  resistance  due  to  the absence of oxide grain boundaries which provide a rapid diffusion path for concentration gradient driven ion movement. 3,4 In the case of metal passivity in aqueous solutions, ion transport is mostly driven  by  the  electric  field  across  the  oxide  film.  The  lack  of  oxide grain boundaries may lower ion migration rates, rendering the passive film more protective. 3-5 The rapid transport and accumulation of cation vacancies at the oxide/metal interface is one theory accounting for oxide breakdown. 6  Moreover, vitreous oxides on amorphous alloys perform well due to enhanced bond flexibility since the vitreous  or  amorphous  material  can  rearrange  to  accommodate  lattice mismatch and strain between the oxide and the metal. 5,7 As a result of this flexibility, almost all surface atoms can bond with oxygen or OH - without requiring an optimal epitaxial relationship between an ordered metal substrate and oxide. 5 Intolerable  changes  in oxide/metal misfit strain with halide incorporation is another theory accounting for the rupture of protective oxide films on metals. 8 The improved corrosion resistance associated with the addition of 18% Cr to Fe is attributed, in  part, to  a  change  in  the  protective  oxide structure from a well oriented spinel structure at 0-12% Cr to a noncrystalline structure at 18% Cr. 5 This disordering has been shown by low energy electron diffraction 9 and recently by scanning tunneling microscopy. 10 A retardation  in  ionic  transport  may  occur  because noncrystalline  films  have  fewer  defects  or  grain  boundaries  to enhance ionic movement. In summary, desirable amorphous oxide and  amorphous  alloy  properties  include  defect  minimization, film ductility, bond flexibility, and efficient, rapid film repassivation. 5,7

In the case of aluminum alloys, the alloying with transition metals to supersaturated solid solution concentrations exceeding equilibrium  solubilities  has  been  a  successful  approach  for  improving localized corrosion resistance. 11-15 Here, the native oxide formed on crystalline Al is already amorphous and the main benefits of nonequilibrium alloying derive from two broad concepts. Alloying elements available in solid solution may be incorporated into the oxide film to enhance its resistance to halide chemisorption and/or penetration. 11,13 Alternatively, alloying elements in the underlying metallic substrate may reduce pit dissolution rates as a function of elec-

* Electrochemical Society Active Member.

z E-mail: Jrs8d@virginia.edu

trochemical potential, 16 increase the severity of critical depassivating pit solutions, or result in oxidized solute with limited solubility in the pit environment. 17

Ion implantation, codeposition by evaporation or sputtering, and rapid solidification are methods to obtain both nonequilibrium alloying and an amorphous condition. High strength can be obtained in the amorphous state without precipitation age hardening in the case of the class of Al-transition metal-rare earth (Al-TM-RE) alloys. 1825 The intermetallic phases in Al-based precipitation age hardened alloys typically severely degrade passivity and corrosion resistance due to local galvanic coupling between precipitates and the matrix. 26 Strength is raised not only when the alloying elements in Al-TM-RE alloys are retained in a disordered solid solution and precipitate formation is suppressed, but is particularly improved upon formation of small nanocrystals in an amorphous matrix. 27-29 However, partial or complete  crystallization  often  significantly  reduces  the  corrosion resistance of amorphous alloys. 30,31 Therefore, the goal of this preliminary  study  was  to  ascertain  whether  Al-TM-RE  glasses  with nanocrystalline embedded in an amorphous matrix could retain the improved corrosion resistance of their amorphous counterparts.

## Experimental

Rapid solidification by deposition of molten alloys on a cooled wheel  was  used  to  produce  amorphous  metal  ribbons. 24,32 Alloy compositions of Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 and Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 were selected based on prior evidence of amorphous behavior. 24,32 Preliminary studies over a range of TM and RE compositions with greater than 80 atom % Al produced negligible differences in localized corrosion behavior.  Selected  area  diffraction, as  well  as  transmission  electron microscopy, confirmed a completely amorphous state in the as-solidified condition for both alloys (Fig. 1a and b). Ribbons of cross-sectional dimensions 0.15 by 0.002 cm were stored at 0°C until testing. Partially nanocrystalline, amorphous matrix variants were produced by an isothermal heat-treatment in evacuated quartz tubes at 150°C for 25 h (Fig. 2a and b). 33 Nanocrystals of approximately 10-15 nm diam were embedded in an amorphous matrix for the Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 alloy. Nanocrystals possessed a composition &gt;98 atom % Al and a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystal structure. The Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 alloy had a slightly broader range in Al nanocrystal diameters (10-25 nm). Transition and rare earth metals were rejected from nanocrystals in both alloys owing to their poor solubility in fcc Al. 33 The Fe or Ni concentrations reached levels in the remaining amorphous matrix of the partially nanocrystalline state that were slightly above completely amorphous levels due to solute rejection from nanocrystals. This concentration  decreased  sharply  at  the  nanocrystal  interface.  The rare earth metal (Y, Gd) concentrations reached maxima at the interface of approximately 9 atom % owing to slow solid-state diffusion

Figure 1. Darkfield transmission electron micrographs with diffraction pattern (inset) for (a) Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 and (b) Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 in the as-formed fully amorphous state.

<!-- image -->

of Gd and Y. 33 Y and Gd concentrations then decreased within the amorphous matrix  to  levels  just  above  those  of  the  wholly  amorphous condition. Embedding 10 nm diam nanocrystals in an amorphous matrix produces high tensile fracture strength, high specific strength  compared  to  conventional  precipitation  age  hardened Albase alloys (Table I), and good ductility. 27-29 Fully microcrystalline alloys were created by heat-treatment at 550°C for 1 h (Fig. 3a and b). 33 Al-rich fcc microcrystals were almost completely depleted of TM and  RE  collected  in Al-TM  and Al-RE  intermetallic  phases. Polycrystalline, high  purity  (99.999%  Al)  foil  with  an  as-drawn grain diam of 10-100 µ m was utilized as a control.

A  conventional  three-electrode  configuration  was  utilized  to determine pitting ( E p )  and repassivation ( E r )  potentials in nitrogen purged 0.6 M NaCl solution (pH 5.9). A saturated calomel reference electrode  (SCE)  was  utilized  and  experiments  were  conducted  at 25°C. Electrode surface areas of 10 -4 cm 2 were utilized by mounting melt-spun ribbon cross sections in Buehler epoxide resin and polishing to a 0.05 µ m finish. High purity Al foil of similar dimensions was tested to eliminate any possible variations in E p with electrode size owing to changes in the exposed, at-risk surface area. 34 The typical experimental procedure involved a 1 h exposure at open-circuit potential, an anodic scan at 0.1 mV/s, and by a reverse in scan direction at a 0.05 mA. E p potentials were determined from achievement of a current density (cd) two orders of magnitude above the passive cd during the anodic scan. Repassivation potentials were obtained during the reverse scan at the potential where an abrupt decrease in

Figure 2. Dark-field  transmission  electron  microscope  images  of  partially nanocrystalline-amorphous  matrix  (a)  Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 and  (b)  Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 illustrating the Al-rich nanocrystal distribution in the amorphous Al-TM-RE matrix.

<!-- image -->

Table I. Typical tensile strength of fully amorphous and partially nanocrystalline-amorphous matrix Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 and Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 alloys compared to a conventional Al-base precipitation age hardened alloy (from Ref. 24, 27, and this study).

| Material           | Microstructure                       |   Tensile strength (MPa) | Density (g/cm 3 )   |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|
| Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5    | Amorphous a                          |                      735 | 3.2                 |
| Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5    | Nanocrystals in amorphous matrix a,b |                     1010 | -                   |
| Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 | Amorphous a                          |                      880 | 3.3                 |
| AA 2024-T3         | Crystalline a                        |                      485 | 2.8                 |

- a All alloys exhibited excellent ductility in 180° bend tests.

b Nanometer diamater fcc crystals embedded in an amorphous matrix.

anodic current density to well below 0.5 mA/cm 2 was achieved. Pit growth  kinetics  were  studied  using  initially  flush  mounted  electrodes (10 -4 cm 2 ) that were electrochemically dissolved to depths of 0.5-0.7 mm by initial anodic polarization to +1 V SCE for 1000 s. Such artificial  pits  were, subsequently, immediately  stepped  down  to applied potentials near the pitting potential of anodic scans and subjected to further sequence of potential steps and holds: 50 mV for 25 s at potentials above the value of E p determined from anodic scans,

Figure  3. Transmission  electron  micrograph  of  the  fully  microcrystalline (a)Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 (dark field) and (b) Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 (bright field). Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 results are from Ref. 33.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

25 mV for 40 s at intermediate potentials, and 10 mV for 25 s until applied  potentials  were  lowered  below E r from anodic scans. The average  current  was  constant  over  time  during  these  holds  but decreased with potential. The short times during each potential step and, thus, small anodic charge served to limit additional change in pit depths after the initial depth established at +1 V SCE . This enabled construction of E - log( i ) curves at nearly constant pit depth. The critical  potential  and  current  density  associated  with  repassivation  of artificial pits was recorded as an abrupt decrease in anodic current and current noise associated with cessation of hydrogen evolution. E-i data from artificial pits were corrected for electrolyte solution resistance using high frequency impedance measurements. E-i data were also corrected for cathodic current in pits that was not measured  by  the  potentiostat.  Anodic  current  efficiency  factors  were determined by comparing actual (by post-test depth measurement) and electrochemically estimated (by integration of net current, i net , to yield net charge) artificial pit penetration depths. The current efficiency factors ( i net / i anodic ) were 0.83 for pure Al, 0.66-0.71 for amorphous alloys, 0.63-0.64 for nanocrystalline alloys, and 0.50-0.54 for the  crystalline  alloys.  The  alloy  equivalent  weights  and  densities used for electrochemical depth calculations were 9.67 g/equiv and 3.2  g/cm 3 for  Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 , 9.89  g/equiv  and  3.3  g/cm 3 for Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 , and 8.99 g/equiv and 2.7 g/cm 3 for high purity Al. Pit bottom areas were smooth enough to enable straightforward calculation of current density. The resulting data are reported as E true vs.

log i anodic where applied potential is ohmically corrected using i net, and i anodic accounts for cathodic reactions in the pit through use of current efficiency factors.

## Results

E p and E r were elevated on amorphous and partially nanocrystalline Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 relative to polycrystalline Al as shown in Table II. E r was raised on amorphous and partially nanocrystalline Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 . E r was much more reproducible than E p . Note that E p values  were  also  elevated  on  10 -4 cm 2 surface  area Al  electrodes compared to larger surface area Al electrodes owing to the smaller at-risk  surface  area  available  for  pitting. 34 E p values  obtained  for larger  Al  electrodes  were  in  excellent  agreement  with  the  literature. 26 E p was elevated on amorphous and partially nanocrystalline Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 even after accounting for electrode surface area effects by  conducting  experiments  on  Al  electrodes  of  the  same  surface area. In contrast, E r was independent of initial electrode surface area and pits of similar depths were repassivated in most cases. This is important because E r often depends on pit depth 35 and variations in pit  depth  from  test  to  test  would  thwart  attempts  to  make  careful material  comparisons. Clearly, the presence of TM and RE in the amorphous alloy matrix results in enhanced E r relative to Al. This is seen both in the amorphous and partially nanocrystalline conditions for both alloys (Table II).

Artificial pit studies (Fig. 4a and b) indicated that significantly more  positive  true  anodic  potentials  were  required  to  achieve  the same  pit  dissolution  rates  for  Al  in  amorphous  and  partially nanocrystalline  alloys.  Moreover, the  anodic  current  density  at which pits repassivated, i crit , was elevated in amorphous and partially nanocrystalline alloys even though all pits were of similar depths. In contrast, fully microcrystalline alloys behaved similarly to polycrystalline Al. The observed differences in E true vs. log i anodic may reflect intrinsic alterations in material pit growth properties at nearly constant artificial pit depth.

## Discussion

E p , E r , and artificial pit growth studies all indicate improvement in  resistance  to  localized  corrosion  initiation  and/or  stabilization, slower  pit  growth, as  well  as  easier  repassivation  in  amorphous alloys.  Figures  4a  and  b  indicate  that E true vs.  log i anodic data  are shifted to substantially more positive potentials and i crit is greater in the amorphous condition. Such improvements may be attributed to either TM and RE alloying elements in solid solution and/or amorphous structure. Note that pit growth in partially nanocrystalline artificial pits is suppressed nearly as much as in fully amorphous artificial pits (i.e., it exhibits a similarly enhanced E r , requires high true potentials to produce a given pit growth rate, and has high values of i crit ). TM and RE solute are depleted from the grains of fully microcrystalline alloys and collected at intermetallic phases. Here, active pit dissolution kinetics predictably approach those of polycrystalline Al and improved resistance to pit dissolution is completely lost.

In the context of critical chemistry models for pit stabilization, 36 E r data suggest but does not prove that either the pit growth potentials  required  to  maintain  depassivation  and/or  the  severity  of the critical depassivating pit solution may be altered by amorphous state and/or retention of alloying elements in solid solution. The artificial  pit  growth  data  (Fig.  4a  and  b)  suggest  that  different E true -log( i anodic ) pit growth behavior is involved in improving repassivation  properties  for  the  amorphous  and  partially  nanocrystalline alloys. Achievement  of  the  same  pit  dissolution  rates  as  seen  for crystalline Al requires 400 mV more positive pit growth potentials. A similar effect was observed for crystalline Fe-Cr-Ni artificial pits when alloyed Mo content was increased 37 and Al-TR alloys. 16 In this study, cessation of active pitting occurs at a higher i crit , suggesting some influence of TM and RE in solid solution. According to Galvele's criterion, 36 repassivation occurring at a higher i crit for  a similar pit depth suggests that repassivation occurs in a more concentrated pit solution.

Regarding the partially nanocrystalline alloys with nanocrystals embedded in an amorphous matrix, it is reasonable to assert that pit

Table II. Pitting ( E p ) and repassivation ( E r ) potentials for Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 and Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 at the 99% confidence level. Potentials reported are in volts vs. a saturated calomel electrode (V SCE ) at 25°C.

| Parameter       | Pure Al a      | Amorphous Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 [Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 ]   | Nanocrystal Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 [Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 ]   | Fully Crystalline Al 90 Fe 5 Gd 5 [Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y 4.3 ]   |
|-----------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| E p (V vs. SCE) | -0.376 ± 0.113 | -0.099 ± 0.093                                    | +0.044 ± 0.130                                      | -0.499 ± 0.163                                            |
| E r (V vs. SCE) | -0.754 ± 0.009 | -0.304 ± 0.007                                    | -0.334 ± 0.009                                      | -0.798 ± 0.006                                            |
|                 |                | [-0.358 ± 0.011]                                  | [-0.371 ± 0.018]                                    | [-0.760 ± 0.008]                                          |

- a 10 -1 cm 2 Al electrodes produced E p and E r of -0.649 ± 0.034 and -0.805 ± 0.033 V, respectively.

<!-- image -->

AlgFeGd

Amorphous Al-Fe-Gd

Crystalline Al-Fe-Gd

Nanocrystalline Al-Fe-Gd

Pure Polycrystalline AI

1e-2

1e-1

Log ranaduc (A/cm)

Figure 4. Ohmically corrected pit growth potential vs. anodic current density for (a) Al 87 Ni 8.7 Y4.3 and (b) Al 90 Fe 5 Gd5 artificial pits compared to pure Al. ( d amorphous alloy), ( e pure Al), ( m partially nanocrystalline alloy), ( j crystalline alloy). The i crit indicates the active pit cd just before repassivation.

initiation  will  occur  more  readily  at Al-rich  nanocrystals  that  lack TM or RE solute. However, such pits would, very quickly, experience  hindered  growth  due  to  the  solute  gradient  that  exists  at  the nanocrystal/amorphous interface, assuming that the behavior in Fig. 4 pertains to this situation. TM and RE in solid solution create the need for even higher anodic potentials to achieve the same rate of Al +3 cation production as in Al. In critical chemistry models of pitting  Al +3 production  must  be  high  enough  to  enable  sufficient hydrolysis and Cl migration to maintain a depassivating pit solution despite the highly destabilizing concentration gradient in the liquid solution  at  pits. 36 Therefore, nanopits  that  grow  to  the  nanocrystal/amorphous interface would require much higher growth potentials than Al to sustain active pit growth. Direct evidence for nanopits at nanocrystals embedded in an amorphous matrix is being sought.

## Acknowledgments

The  financial  support  of  the  Virginia  Academic  Enhancement Program and helpful discussions with A. Csontos, G. Shiflet, and J. Poon  of  the  University  of  Virginia  are  gratefully  acknowledged. Electrochemical instrumentation and software in the CESE are supported by EG&amp;G Instruments and Scribner Associates, Incorporated.

The University of Virginia assisted in meeting the publication costs of this article.

## References

1. K. Hashimoto and T. Masumoto, Mater. Sci. Eng., 23 , 285 (1976).
2. K. Hashimoto, K. Osada, T. Masumoto, and S. Shimodaira, Corros. Sci., 16 , 71 (1976).
3. F.  P .  Fehlner, in Passivity  of  Metals, R.  P.  Frankenthal  and  J.  Kruger, Editors, p. 181, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ (1978).
4. F. P. Fehlner and N. F. Mott, Oxid. Met., 2 , 59 (1970).
5. A.  G.  Revesz  and  J.  Kruger, in Passivity  of  Metals, R.  P.  Frankenthal  and J. Kruger, Editors, p. 137, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ (1978).
6. L. F. Lin, C.  Y . Chao, and D. D. Macdonald, J. Electrochem. Soc., 128 , 1194 (1981).
7. T. P. Hoar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 117 , 17C (1970).
8. N. Sato, Electrochim. Acta, 19 , 1683 (1971).
9. C. L. McBee and J. Kruger, Electrochim. Acta, 17 , 1337, (1972).
10. M. P. Ryan, R. C. Newman, and G. E. Thompson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 141 , L164 (1994).
11. P. Natishan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 135 , 321 (1988).
12. G. D. Davis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 140 , 951 (1993).
13. W. C. Moshier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 134 , 2677 (1987).
14. B.  A.  Shaw, G.  D.  Davis, T. L.  Fritz, B.  J.  Rees, and  W.  C.  Moshier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 137 , 1317 (1990).
15. G. S.  Frankel, M. A.  Russak, C. V.  Jahnes, M.  Mirzamaani, and V. A. Brusic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 136 , 1243 (1989).
16. G. S. Frankel, R. C. Newman, C. V. Jahnes, and M. A. Russak, J. Electrochem. Soc., 140 , 2192 (1993).
17. Z. Szklarska-Smialowska, Corros. Sci., 33 , 1193 (1992).
18. A. Inoue, K. Ohtera, A. P. Tsai, and T. Masumoto, Jpn. J. App. Phys., 27 , L479 (1988).
19. A. Inoue, K. Ohtera, and T. Masumoto, Jpn. J. App. Phys., 27 , L736 (1988).
20. G. J. Shiflet, Y . He, and S. J. Poon, Scr. Metall., 22 , 1661 (1988).
21. Y. He, S. J. Poon, and G. J. Shiflet, Scr. Metall., 22 , 1813 (1988).
22. Y. He, H. Chen, G. J. Shiflet,and S. J. Poon, Philos. Mag. Lett., 6 , 297 (1990).
23. Y. He, G. M. Dougherty, G. J. Shiflet, and S. J. Poon, Acta. Metall., 41 , 337 (1993).
24. G. J. Shiflet, Y . He, and S. J. Poon, J. Appl. Phys., 64 , 6863 (1988).
25. Y. He, S. J. Poon, and G. J. Shiflet, Science, 241 , 1640 (1988).
26. S.  T.  Pride, J.  R.  Scully, and  J.  L.  Hudson, in Electrochemical  Noise Measurements  for  Corrosion  Applications, p.  307, ASTM, Philadelphia, PA (1996).
27. H. Chen, Y. He, G. J. Shiflet, and S. J. Poon, Scr. Metall., 25 , 1421 (1991).
28. Hono, Y. Zhang, A. P. Tsai, A. Inoue, and T. Sakurai, Scr.Metall., 32 , 191 (1995).
29. H. S. Chen, in Micromechanics of Advanced Materials, S. N. G. Chu, P. K. Liaw, R.  J. Arsenault, K.  Sadananda, K.S.  Chan, W. W.  Gerberich, C.  C.  Chau, and T. M. Kung, Editors, p. 295, TMS, Pittsburgh, PA (1995).
30. R.  Chmielewski, R.  Sodhi, S.  J.  Thorpe, in Corrosion  Electrochemistry  and Catalysis of Metastable Metals and Intermetallics, C. Clayton and K. Hashimoto, Editors, PV  93-30, p.  84, The  Electrochemical  Society  Proccedings  Series, Pennington, NJ (1993).
31. R. G. Buchheit, Jr., G. E. Stoner, and G. J. Shiflet, in The Application of Surface Analysis  Methods  to  Environmental/Material  Interactions, D.  R.  Baer, C.  R. Clayton, and G. D. Davis, Editors, PV 91-7, p. 490, The Electrochemical Society Proceedings Series, Pennington, NJ (1991).
32. A. Inoue, K. Ohtera, A. Tsai, and T. Masumoto, J. Appl. Phys., 27 , L479 (1988).
33. A. A. Csontos, M.S. Thesis, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, V A (1996).
34. G. T. Burstein and G. O. Ilevbare, Corros. Sci., 38 , 2257 (1996).
35. G. S. Frankel, J. R. Scully, and C. V . Jahnes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 143 , 1834 (1996).
36. J. R. Galvele, J. Electrochem. Soc., 123 , 464 (1976).
37. R. C. Newman, Corros. Sci., 25 , 341 (1985).

(V vs SCE)

LLi

-0.1

-0.2

0.3

0.4

S0-

-0.6

-0.7

-0.8

-0.9

1e3

4b

1e+0