## Susceptibility  of  Cr-Ni-Mn  Stainless Steels  to Pitting in Chloride Solutions*

## E. LUNARSKA,  Z. SZKLARSKA-SMIALOWSKA, and M  JANIK-CZACHOR*

## Abstract

Anodic behavior of 18Cr-5Ni steels  containing 0.03 to  15%  Mn  was  studied in  0.1N  H 2 SO 4 solution with additions of  0.01 to  0.1 N  NaCl.  The  presence  of  5.7  to 15%  Mn  in  those  steels  decreases  their ability to  passivate  and  their resistance  to  pitting. The  most  susceptible locations for pit nucleation are boundaries between the austenite matrix and the carbide particles. The pitting resistance of chromium-nickel-manganese steels is discussed  with respect  to  their phase compositions.

Only  a  scarcity of  information on  the susceptibility of  Cr-Ni-Mn stainless  steels to  pitting  exists in the  literature,  and  the  few existing data are controversial.  This is chiefly  due  to  the  fact  that  these  steels are extremely sensitive to the presence of minor components, particularly  nitrogen.  Researchers  have not  paid  sufficient  respect  to this  element.  Thus,  Murgulescu  and  Radovici  1 studied the  anodic behavior  of  steels  with  17  to  19% Cr,  S to  7% Ni,  and  4.4  to  7.7% Mn, and  found  a detrimental  effect  of increasing Mn content on the ability  of these  steels to  passivate. On the  other  hand,  Knyazheva,  et al, 2 observed that addition of up to 10% Mn to  18%Cr-5%Ni steels  does  not affect  the  passive  dissolution rate  in  sulfuric  acid solutions,  but increases  the  critical  current density  and  the  critical passivation  potential. Unfortunately, in  both papers, the  nitrogen content  was not  indicated.

Condylis,  et  al, 3 compared  the  corrosion  resistance  of  304L  and 316L  austenitic  stainless  steels  with  that  of  substitutional 204L  and 216L  steels  containing about 6% Ni,  10% Mn,  and  0.2%  N.  The substitutional low-nickel  steels behaved  like  the  ordinary  austenitic stainless  steels  in  many  solutions. The  important exception was nitric  acid.  In  that  solution,  the  manganese  steels were less resistant. In  chloride  solutions,  the  pitting  resistance  of  Mn-containing  steels was higher than  that  of  304L and  316L  steels.

According  to  Shams  El  Din,  et  al, 4  who  investigated  the  anodic behavior  of  l 7Cr-5Ni  steels  containing  from  0.03  to  13.9% Mn, the corrosion  behavior  of  the  l 7Cr-5Ni-S.6Mn alloy  approaches that  of the  18Cr-8Ni steel.  However,  a further  increase  in the  Mn content  is detrimental to  both  the  corrosion  resistance  and ability  to  passivate. In  a  subsequent  paper, 5 these  authors  argue that  additions  of  Mn to l 7Cr-5Ni  alloys adversely  affect their pitting resistance. On  the contrary, the  experimental results of  Troselius 6 suggest  that  Mn addition to Cr-Ni  steels  has  a  beneficial  influence on  the  pitting resistance.

When considering  the  effect  of  Mn on  the  corrosion  resistance of  stainless  steels,  it  must  be  taken  into  account  that  the  change in the  chemical  composition  might  be accompanied  by a change in the phase  composition of  the alloy.  This  change  could significantly affect  the  mechanical  and chemical properties.  In this respect,  minor elements  and  impurities (C,N,P) play  a  role  as  important as  that  of Cr, Ni, and Mn.

The  purpose of  the  present work  was  to  study the  effect of different additions of Mn  to the 18Cr-5Ni  alloy  on  the phase composition  and  susceptibility  to pitting  in chloride  solutions.

## Experimental

Alloys used  for  this  study  were kindly  supplied  by  the  Institute of  Iron  Metallurgy  (Gliwice, Poland)  in the  form  of hot  forged  rods,

*submitted for publication  April,  1974.

*Institute  of  Physical Chemistry  of the  Polish Academy  of  Sciences, Warsaw, Kasprzaka 44, Poland.

TABLE 1 -Chemical Composition of  18Cr-5Ni-Mn Stainless Steels(l) (%)

|    Mn | C      |   Si |     p |     s |   Cr |   Ni | N       |
|-------|--------|------|-------|-------|------|------|---------|
|  0.03 | 0.0075 | 0.23 | 0.034 | 0.014 | 17.2 | 5.51 | 0.066   |
|  5.7  | 0.0190 | 0.27 | 0.029 | 0.014 | 17.4 | 5.47 | 0.061   |
|  9.6  | 0.013  | 0.57 | 0.031 | 0.014 | 17.6 | 5.52 | 0.049   |
| 11.7  | 0.015  | 0.23 | 0.03  | 0.018 | 17.6 | 5.48 | 0.065   |
| 15.1  | 0.0015 | 0.5  | 0.03  | 0.018 | 17.6 | 5.44 | 0.086   |
| 10    | n.d.   | 0.5  | 0.027 | 0.017 | 17.5 | 5.69 | • 0.019 |

(I &gt;chemical analysis  performed by the Institute of Iron Metallurgy Gliwice,  Poland.

18 mm  in diameter. Compositions  of these  alloys are listed in Table 1.

The  steels  were tested both in  the  as-received  and  quenched conditions. Quenching  in  water  occurred  after  either  (  1) heating  1 hour  in  air  at  1050  C,  (2)  heating  0.5  hour  in  air  at  1050  C, or (3) heating  0.5  hour  in  air  at  950  C. The  specimens were  cut  from rods and  mounted in  epoxy resin  so  that  the  exposed  surface  area  was about  0.8  cm:. This  surface  was  coarse-ground  with  silicon-carbide papers and  then  fine-ground  with  alumina  paste.

The  electrochemical measurements were  performed at  25  C in 0.lN  H2SO4 with  different additions of  NaCl ranging from  0.01  to 0.lN.

To compare the pitting susceptibility with the ability to passivate, potentiokinetic polarization curves  were  measured, step by  step,  using  a  rate  of  SO mV  per  30  seconds.  This  enabled  the determination of  the  following  parameters: potential of  pit  nuclea­ tion (E~p), critical passivation potential (Ekp), critical current density  for  passivation  Cikp),  and  current  density  in the  passive state Op)· Those  parameters are  indicated in  Figure  1 for  the  example  of steel with  5.7% Mn.

Before and after exposure to the corrosive solution, the specimens  were  examined  by  optical  microscopy. Complementary X-ray diffraction and electron microprobe analysis  studies  were performed.

## Results

## Phase Composition

In the as-received  specimens of the 18Cr-5Ni-0.03Mn  steel, metallographic examination revealed the presence of  martensite with some inclusions of 6-ferrite. These mostly appeared at boundaries  of the  original austenite  grains.

As determined l&gt;y X-ray  analysis,  the  alloys with  more  than  5% Mn  contained austenite and ferrite. No  traces of  a-phase  were detected.

The  electron  microprobe analysis  revealed  some  enrichment of

FIGURE 1 -Effect of heat treatment on the anodic polarization  curves of  18  Cr-5  Ni-10  Mn  steel.

<!-- image -->

1050:C/a'l,

950°C/ao,

FIGURE 2 -Anodic  polarization curves of  18Cr-5Ni steels with  different  additions  of  Mn.

<!-- image -->

th:  ferrite  phase  in Cr, with  impoverishment in  Fe,  Ni, and  Mn.

The  amount of  Ii-phase  depended upon  the  steel  composition. The  higher the Mn  content was  and  the  lower the  C  and  the  N contents were,  the  greater  the  amount of  Ii-phase present.  However, heat-to-heat variations also  very  likely  influenced the  phase  compo­ sition  of  the  alloys  under  investigation.

In all specimens, small particles of a foreign phase were detected. They were identified by electron probe analysis as carbides  (presumably  Me23C6)-

Quenching did not essentially change  the  phase  composition, but it affected the  grain  morphology and homogeneity. Thus,  a longer  duration and  a higher  annealing  temperature before  quench­ ing induced  homogenization of both  the  Ii and  -y-phases, and  a slight increase  in  size  of  the Ii-grains,  whose  shape  became more  nearly round. Moreover,  the  tendency of  Ii-grains and  of  grain  boundaries to  be  attacked by  etchants decreased significantly after  quenching. This  was  accompanied by an  increase in  the ability rn  passivate (Figure 2).  Therefore, most of  the  electrochemical and  corrosion experiments were  performed on  specimens  quenched after  1 hour  of heating  at 1050 C.

## Electrochemical Measurements

Some  examples of anodic polarization curves measured on quenched steels  in  O.lN  H 2 S04  +  O.OlN NaCl are given in  Figure 1. There  are  only slight  differences between the shapes  of  the  curves for  ferritic-austenitic steels  containing from  5.  7 to  15% Mn, whereas the  curve  for  the martensitic-ferritic steel  with 0.03% Mn is quite different. This  steel  is passive  in  the  above  medium, so  there  is  no range  of  an  active  metal  dissolution, and  the  current  density  within the passive  region is  significantly lower than that for the other steels.  Differences also  occur within the  transpassive region.  These differences occurred in  all  the  solutions used,  i.e.,  containing from

<!-- image -->

Mn

FIGURE 3 -Effect of  Mn  content on  critical passivation potential.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 4 -Effect of  Mn content on  current density in passive  state.

0.01 to  O.lN  NaCl in O.lN  H2S04.

Plots characterizing the ability of the steels to  passivate are summarized  in  Figures  3  and  4.  According  to  Figure  3, Ekp  shows a tendency to  increase  with  the  Mn content in  the  range  from  5.7  to 15%.  Similarly, ip  increased  with the  percentage of  Mn  (Figure  4), and  such  a tendency was also  found  for  ikp- Comparison of ip values observed for  specimens in  the as-received  condition with those  in the  quenched condition (Figure  4)  shows  again  that  heat  treatment considerably improves the ability of the steels to anodically passivate.

The  results  in  Figure  5  show  that  an  increase  in the  Mn content from 0.03 to  5.7%  has  a  detrimental effect on  the propensity of these steels to pitting. Within this range, E~p  manifests a  sharp decrease, while a  further addition of Mn  to the alloy does not significantly affect that value. The heat treatment does not significantly influence the value  of  E~p, which  is almost  identical for the  as-received  and, quenched steels.

## Metallographic Examination  After  Corrosion

In the as-received condition, i.e., hot forged steels, the

FIGURE 5 nucleation. Effect of Mn  content on  potential of pit

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 6 -Typical micrograph of forged steel  after corrosion.  1600X

<!-- image -->

formation of  pits  was  accompanied by  etching  of  both  the  8-ferritc grains and grain boundaries (Figure 6).  The  pits predominantly formed  at  the  boundaries between  'Y  and 8 phases,  which  both  were attacked  during  the  further  pit  development. On the  contrary, in the quenched  steels,  no etching  of  the 'Y-8 boundaries  was  observed,  and no  pits  formed  at  them.  There  were  some  indications suggesting  that the  pit  nucleation occurred at  boundaires between the  'Y-phase  and carbide particles. Quite often, pits were  observed at sites  where inclusions  of  the  Ii-phase were  rather  rare,  and  at  large  accumulation of this  phase,  pitting  did  not  occur  (Figure  7).

In  the  quenched steels, the o-phase is  very resistant against pitting and does not undergo any dissolution during pit  growth (Figure 8).  This  conclusion is  valid  for all  the steels  investigated,

FIGURE 7 -Typical micrograph of  quenched  steel  after corrosion.  1600X

<!-- image -->

FIGURE 8 -Pit  growth  in quenched austenitic-ferritic steel, y-phase  undergoes  corrosion, whereas  8-phase  remains  un­ attacked.

<!-- image -->

irrespective of  their  Mn content. It should  also  be  pointed out  that in the case of steel with 0.03%  Mn,  the austenite degradation products do not play any part in  stimulating the  pit  nucleation process.

## Discussion

Our results show that the presence of 5.7 to 15%  Mn  in 18Cr-5Ni  steels  adversely  affects their  ability to  passivate  and  their resistance to  pitting (Figures  3-5).  This  harmful  effect  increases  with increasing  Clconcentration in  the  electrolyte. The effect  is greater for  steels  in  the  as-received  condition, i.e.,  hot  forged  steels,  than  in q  uenchect  steels.

A  decrease of the corrosion resistance of  18Cr-5Ni-Mn  steels relative  to  the  18Cr-8Ni  austenitic stainless  steels  cannot  be  ascribed to the presence of the o-phase (o-ferrite) in the alloys under investigation. This  conclusion is  based  on  the  following  arguments: (]) the  relatively  high  corrosion  resistance  and  ease of  passivation  of the martensitic-ferritic steel, (2) the corrosion immunity of the 8-phase  in  quenched alloys,  and  (3) the  similar  shapes  of  the  anodic polarization curves  for  quenched alloys containing 9.6%  Mn  and I  0%  Mn,  despite their different phase  compositions. The  10% Mn alloy  contained much  more  Ii-ferrite  than  the  other  alloy.

Suggestion can be made that in ternary Cr-Ni-Mn  alloys compared with ordinary Cr-Ni  stainless steels,  the austenite has  a lower  ability to  be  passivated  anodically in  chloride solutions, and forms  weaker  passive films.

As  revealed by  metallographic examination, the  most  suscep­ tible locations for pit nucleation in quenched steels are the

boundaries between the  ')'-phase  and  carbide  particles. E~p  is nearly equal for  both the  hot-forged and  quenched alloys. This  suggests that  in  both cases  the  most  susceptible locations for  pit  nucleation are  the  same.  In  hot forged  steels,  fine  carbide  precipitations were observed at ')'-Ii-boundaries,  as well as  within the Ii-phase itself (l'igure 7). These precipitates form during hot forging or slow cooling  as  a result  of  the  Ii-phase  degradation. The  relatively  higher corrosiveness  of  the  Ii-phase in the  as-received  alloys  was most  likely due  to  those  carbide  precipitates.

## Conclusions

- I. Addition of  5.7  to  15% Mn  to l 8Cr-5Ni  steels  diminishes their  ability  to  be  passivated  and  their  resistance to  pitting.
2.  The most susceptible locations for pit nucleation in the quenched steels  are  the  boundaries between  the  ,,-phase  and  carbide particles.
3.  The presence of the Ii-phase  in  the steels  does not affect

## References

- I. J.  G.  Murgulescu  and  0. Radovici. Z.  Phys.  Chem.,  Vol.  214,  p. 288  (1960).
2.  V.  M.  Knyazheva, M.  A.  Vedeneeva, S.  Esseldin-Halil, and  Ya. Kolotyrkin. Zashchita  Metallov.,  Vol.  1, p.  465  (1965).
3.  A.  Condylis, F. Bayon,  and  A.  Desestret. Rev.  Metallurgie,  Vol. 67,  (l 970)  May.
4. A. M. Shams El Din, M. M. Badran, and S. E. Khalil. Werkst.u.Korros., Vol.  23,  p.  576  (1972); and  Werkst.u.Korros., Vol.  24,  p.  23  (1973).
5. A. M. Shams El Din, M. M. Badran, and S. E. Khalil. Werkst.u.Korros., Vol.  24,  p.  290  (1973).
6. L. Troselius.  Corrosion Sci., Vol.  11, p.  4  73  (1971 ).
7. 0. A. Bannykh. Metallovedenie i  Termicheskaya Obrabotka Metallov.,  No.  4,  p.  6  (1964 ).

## Effect  of  Plating Current Density  on Properties of  Titanium-Cadmium Deposit*

DAN ALTURA*  and FLORIAN  MANSFE'LD**

## Abstract

Titanium-cadmium plating was evaluated at various plating current densities which may be encountered in  industrial practice. Both high and  low  current densities resulted in  increased  hydrogen embrittlement tendency over the optimal plating condition. Deleting the current strike had no noticeable effect on  embrittlement behavior. Salt  spray  testing indicated that gross corrosion behavior was  independent of plating current density. The  corrosion behavior of  cadmium-plated steel  coupled to  aluminum alloys was  both a  function of plating current density and  the  type of  aluminum alloy used.  Plate  microstructure was  a strong  function of  plating current density.

The  addition of  titanium compounds to  a cadmium-cyanide plating bath  was  originally  suggested  as  a means  of improving  the  corrosion resistance of the resultant cadmium plate. 1 Subsequently it  was discovered  that  the  addition of  TiO 3 (pcrtitanate) to  the  cadmium­ cyanide  bath  significantly  reduces  the  amount of hydrogen absorbed by the steel substrate.24 This effect has  been attributed to the codeposition of  titanium with  the  cadmium,  resulting  in a change  in the structure of the deposit which guards against the entry of hydrogen into the steel.  3 , 5 In order to further reduce the embrittling tendency of this cyanide bath, the use of organic brighteners has  been  eliminated. The  lower  embrittlement tendency of the titanium-cadmium (Ti-Cd) plating bath has made it an effective  replacement for the  bright cyanide  bath in  the  plating of high-strength  steels.

Optimal operation of the Ti-Cd plating bath requires tight control of plating bath parameters. Chemical composition of  the bath is controlled through periodic chemical analysis of such important bath constituents as  Ti, Cd,  and cyanide. One  plating parameter which is  difficult to  control effectively and  can  some­ times  fall  outside the  optimal range  is local  plating  current  density. The  plating current density at  edges  or  other projections can  he significantly greater than the nominal value, while in  voids the current density can  be  smaller  than the  nominal. This  study was initiated to  investigate the  effect of  plating current density on  the performance of  the  Ti-Cd  bath. Bath  performance was evaluated  in

*submitted for  publication November,  1974.

*Los Angeles Aircraft Division, Rockwell International Los Angeles,  California  90009.

**Science  Center, Rockwell International Thousand Oaks,  Califor­ nia 91360.

terms of hydrogen embrittlement tendency of  the steel  substrate and  corrosion  behavior  of  the  deposit.

## Experimental Procedure

Plating  solutions contained 15  oz/gal  (112  g/1) sodium  cyanide and 3.4 oz/gal (25.4 g/1)  CdO. Titanium content of the  plating solution was controlled by using atomic absorption analysis. Temperature of  the  bath was  maintained at  21  (±  3)  C.  Cadmium balls  were  the  anodes. Plating  current densities which  were  studied are  given  in  Table 1. Average  plating  thickness was  13 µm (0.0005 inch).  Specimens  were  not  baked  after  being  plated.

Hydrogen  embrittlement testing  was  done  by  recording  time  to failure  of  HEP  embrittlement test  strips  (Luster-On Products, Inc) which had a stress applied to  them by  bending and  placing in  a Lucite  fixture within 1 hour  after  plating.  6 - These  strips  were  shown to be very sensitive to  hydrogen embrittlement and also repro­ ducible in a previous study on porous Cd  plating. 6 Corrosion behavior was  evaluated using the salt spray test (ASTM  method B-117)  and  a galvanic  couple  test.  AISI  4130  steel  sheet  was utilized for  both types  of  tests.  In  the  galvanic  couple  test,  Ti-Cd  plated  steel was  coupled to either Al  2024-T851 or  Al  7075-T7651 alloys  in 3.5%  NaCl  for  a  period of 24  hours. The  Cd  dissolution rate  was calculated by  weighing  the  Cd/steel  sample  before  and  after  the  test to  0.1  mg  and  dividing  by  the  geometric area  and  time  of test.  The average  galvanic  current ~nsity (lg) was  calculated by  dividing  the average  galvanic  current Og, obtained by  integration of  the  galvanic current-time trace)  by  the  geometric area  of  the  Cd/steel  specimen. The test methods used here are described in greater detail elsewhere.  6

## Results  and Discussion

Table 1. which  summarizes  the  results,  indicates that  variation