SSSR, 117,441  (1957).

23.  J. Koutecky  and V.  G.  Levich, Zh. Fiz. Khim., 32, 1565 (1958).
24. P.  Lessner, F.  R.  McLarnon, and E.  J.  Cairns, Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory Report  no.  LBL-22399 (1986).
25.  W. Giggenbach, Inorg.  Chem., 11,  1201  (1972).
27. H.  Reller and  E. Kirowa-Eisner, J.  Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 103, 335 (1979).
26.  W. Giggenbach, ibid., 13,  1724  (1974).
28.  J.  O'M. Bockris and A.  K.  N.  Reddy,  "Modern Electrochemistry," Chap.  9,  Plenum  Press, Inc., New York (1970).
29. D.  G.  Wierse, M. M. Lohrengel, and  J.  W. Shultze, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 92,  121 (1978).
30.  I. C.  Hamilton and R. Woods, J. Appl.  Electrochem., 13,

783 (1983).

31.  D.  Lando,  J. Manassen, G.  Hodes,  and  D. Cahen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 101, 3969 (1979).
32.  R.  Tenne,  N.  Mfiller, Y: Mirovsky, and  D.  Lando, This Journal, 130, 852 (1983).
34. N. Hartler, J.  Libert, and A. Teder, Ind.  Eng.  Chem. Process Des. Dev., 6, 398 (1967).
33.  K.  W. Frese, Jr. and  D.  Canfield, ibid., 132,  1649  (1985).
35.  E.  Najdeker and  E. Bishop, J. Electroanal.  Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 41, 79 (1973).
36. S.  Kapusta, A.  Viehbeck, S.  M. Wilhelm, and  N.  Hackerman, ibid., 153,  157  (1983).
37.  K.  M. Abraham,  R. D.  Rauh, and S. B.  Brummer, Electrochim. Acta, 23,  501  (1978).
38. R. D. Rauh, F.  S.  Shuker,  J.  M. Marston,  and S.  B. Brummer, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 39, 1761 (1977).
39.  W.  Giggenbach, Personal communication (1986).

## Corrosion Behavior of  Aluminum-Molybdenum Alloys  in  Chloride Solutions

W. C. Moshier, G. D.  Davis,  J.  S.  Ahearn,  and  H. F.  Hough

Martin  Marietta Laboratories, Department  of Materials and  Surface Science,  BaLtimore, Maryland  21227

## ABSTRACT

The electrochemical response of  A1 alloys containing various concentrations of  Mo in  solid solution was studied using potentiodynamic polarization. The  evolution of the  chemical composition of  the  passive film during exposure to  deaerated 0.1N  KC1 was analyzed using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Exposure  of  A1-Mo  alloys to the chloride solution results in an increase in  the  corrosion potential and  a  decrease in  the cathodic Tafel slope. The breakdown  potential is also found to  increase with  higher concentrations of  Mo  in  the alloy. These results correlate with  an  increase in the amount of  Mo  in the  oxide  film during polarization, even though the concentration of  Mo in  the  passive film is well  below  that in  the  alloy. This work suggests that the oxidized Mo in  the  passive film inhibits the nucleation of  pits in  the  alloy by  improving the integrity of  the  passive film.

Aluminum is a reactive metal  that owes its resistance to environmental attack  to the  formation of  an  inert passive film on its surface. The rate that the  passive film dissolves in  aqueous  solutions controls the general corrosion characteristics of  the  metal. Between pH 4 and  9, the solubility of  the  passive film  decreases and  protects the  metal substrate from attack  (1). Away  from  nearneutral pH  conditions, the  solubility of  the  film  and, therefore, the  general  corrosion rate  of  the  metal  increases (2, 3).

Mo +8  and  Mo +4,  were  detected (7, 8). It was suggested that the  inhibiting effect may be due to  molybdate  adsorption, reduction, and  inclusion in  the passive film, thereby improving the  film's resistance to  local attack, possibly by blocking paths  used  by the  CI= anion to reach  the oxide/metal interface.

To determine whether  reduction of  the ion is essential to  improving the  passivity of  A1 exposed  to  chloride solutions, we  directly alloyed Mo  to  A1 to  eliminate the presence of  the higher Mo valence state (Mo+6),  thereby removing  the reduction step from  the inhibiting process. Because  the  solid solubility of  Mo  in  A1 is very  low,  efforts to  eliminate pitting by  its addition to  A1 using a  conventional ingot metallurgy approach  have  been  unsuccessful. Addition of  Mo  to  A1 generally leads to  the  preferential nucleation of  pits at the precipitates in  the alloy, and  the  pitting resistance of  the  material is  d i m i n i s h e d from that of the pure  metal. Recently, Mo  has  been  directly alloyed to  A1 using ion  implantation (10,  11) and RF-magnetron  sputter-deposition (12). Both  techniques allow the Mo  to  be  retained in  solid solution with the A1 at  concentrations well  above  its  solubility limit in  A1 without  the  formation of  Mo-rich  precipitates (12,  13). The resistance of  these A1-Mo  alloys to  pitting attack is substantially increased. Figure  1  shows the  effect that adding 6  atom  percent  (a/o)  Mo to an A1  sputterdeposited film has  on the pitting potential, as  measured potentiodynamically (12). The same concentration of  Mo was even  sufficient to  passivate the  alloy when it  was tested in  air-saturated chloride solutions.

The results of the polarization behavior of  the  alloy containing Mo  in  solid solution with  A1 are  similar to the tests on pure  A1 conducted  in  aqueous  solutions containing molybdates, where pitting potentials as  high  as + 1V,  with  respect to  the  saturated calomel  electrode (SCE),  have  been  reported (6), and  the  resistance of  the material to  localized attack is  increased significantly.

The presence of  certain aggressive anions in  the  solution, most  notably chlorides, results in the  localized attack of the passive film. The pits that form during the attack  are  caused  by an accelerated dissolution of  the passive film  and of  the  metal  substrate. This,  in  turn, leads to  locally high current densities and  changes  in the solution chemistry inside the  pit. The pitting process involves a  series of  reaction steps including the  adsorption of  the  C1- anion and its chemical  interaction with  the passive  film  and subsequent thinning of  the  film  followed by  the exposure and  rapid dissolution of  the  metal substrate (4).  The  overall process  can be effectively controlled in  a l u m i n u m   t h r o u g h   the  use of inhibitors, such  as  either molybdates, chromates, or nitrates (5, 6), in  the solution. The mechanism by  which  the  corrosion inhibitor improves  the  integrity of  the  passive film is  not clearly understood. Results of  analyses of  the  interaction of  inhibitors with  aluminum  using x-ray  photoelectron spectroscopy  (XPS)  and  Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) indicate that the  inhibitor anion  is incorporated into the passive film during exposure to  the solution (7-9). The common  characteristic of  these inhibitors  and their interaction with  the  passive film  is  that their chemical  state, as  measured  by XPS, is  reduced from the higher valence state in  the  inhibitor during the incorporation of  the  species into the  passive film. In the case  of  the  molybdate  inhibitor, two chemical  states,

<!-- image -->

weight loss,  and  determining the  concentration of Mo and A1 in  the solvent. This information  was compared with the results of  t h e   X P S   analysis.

Electron  microscopy and  x-ray diffraction.--The HSEM was performed on a JEOL  100 CX  at  40 kV on the sample surface  in both the as-sputtered  condition  and after exposure to  the  electrolyte  following polarization. The  samples  were  coated  with a thin  layer  of  platinum prior  to  analysis, in  order  to  r e d u c e   c h a r g i n g of  t h e   s u r face. Specimens were prepared  for  transmission electron microscopy (TEM)  by polishing the  back side  of  the  silicon until the  final thickness of  t h e   w a f e r   w a s  c l o s e to  50 ~m. A  copper-rhodium  mask with  an oval  hole  was then glued to  the  polished silicon side  with epoxy. An  area thin enough for  t r a n s m i s s i o n of  a 100  k V  b e a m   w a s  m a d e by ion  milling  the Si  side  w i t h   a r g o n on a Gatan  Model 600 ion  miller at  14 ~  a n d   3  k V   u n t i l perforation. The sample  was milled  on a cold  stage  to  prevent  heating  during thinning.

Fig.  1. Potentiodynarnic  polarization curves for AI and for  AI with 6 weight percent Mo  in  solid solution  in deaerated and air-saturated 0.1N KCI solutions  at  pH  8.

The  improvement in  the  ability of  t h e   p a s s i v e film  to  resist localized attack in  e a c h   c a s e   suggests a similar mechanism for  Mo  interaction with  the  passive film. However, the  passive film  that  forms  when an A1-Mo  alloy  is  exposed to an aggressive  chloride-containing electrolyte must evolve  through  a series of  steps that  are  likely to  b e quite  different  han  those  occurring when  A1 is  exposed to  a molybdate inhibitor.  Understanding the  nature of the  evolution of  t h e   p a s s i v e film  in  e i t h e r   s y s t e m , in  response  to  the  exposure  of  A1 to  chloride-containing solutions, is  e s s e n t i a l in  i s o l a t i n g the  key elements  that play  a role  in  i m p r o v i n g   r e s i s t a n c e to  localized  attack.

The  presence  of  precipitates in  t h e   f i l m s   was  determined  using  selected area  diffraction (SAD), as  well  as glancing  angle x-ray  diffraction (XRD). The  SAD pat: terns were made  at  100 kV. The glancing angle  XRD was performed on a Siemens  diffractometer  using a monochromatic  Cu K~ x-ray  source. The angle  between the  incident  x-rays  and the  specimen was held  constant at  12 ~  , while  the  detector for  t h e   d i f f r a c t e d x-rays  was swept in an arc  around  the  sample. This  technique  improved  the signal-to-noise of  t h e   a s - d e p o s i t e d A1-Mo  film  over  conventional diffraction techniques  by at  least 50%, and also eliminated diffraction from the  silicon substrate.

In this  investigation,  the  response of  A1  alloys  containing various  concentrations of Mo  in  solid solution to anodic  and  cathodic  potentiodynamic polarization  has been  used  to  characterize  the  corrosion  behavior of  t h e material in  0.1N KC1. The evolution in  t h e   s u r f a c e chemistry of  t h e   p a s s i v e film  as  a result of  c h a n g e s   i n   the  electrochemistry  of  the  system  have  been analyzed,  using XPS  and  high-resolution  scanning  electron  microscopy (HSEM). The results of  this work are  discussed in  l i g h t of the molybdate-inhibited A1 system.

## Experimental Procedure

Specimen  preparation.--Metal films  of  A1 alloyed  with various concentrations of Mo were  prepared  by  codepositing the two elements  onto a  5  cm  diam singlecrystal silicon wafer,  using  the RF  magnetron sputter deposition process. This  process  involves using  two separate  A1 and Mo  targets to  g r o w  films at  a r a t e   of  5/~/s. The  vacuum  pressure in  t h e   c h a m b e r   prior to  s p u t t e r i n g was 10  -7  torr. Immediately  after the  start of  s p u t t e r deposition, the  silicon was cooled  to  near  -196~ to  m i n i m i z e heating the alloy  during  sputtering  and  suppress the  formation  of Mo-rich  precipitates. The films were not cooled  before  sputter deposition to  a v o i d   using the wafer as  a cold  finger and increasing  contamination of  t h e   surface.  Between  0.8  and 1.0  ~m  of  the  A1-Mo  alloy  was deposited  onto  the  Si.  After  deposition, the  temperature  of the  alloy increased slowly  to  ambient  prior to  its removal from the  vacuum  chamber.

The  composition  of  the  film  was controlled by setting the A1  target  to the  maximum power  and  varying  the power to  the  Mo target. Because the  targets were close  to the  Si, the  composition  of  the  alloy varied  across the  wafer. Specimens  used  for  this study  were taken  from  the center  of  the  wafer,  where  the  compositional  and thickness  gradients were the  lowest. The  center of  t h e   w a f e r was separated into  eight  sections by cleaving the  silicon along  lines scribed  onto  its rear  surface. Sections  of  the films  that  were scratched  during handling were not  used in  t h e   p o l a r i z a t i o n tests. The  average Mo  composition  in each  area  of  the  film  was determined  on a duplicate sample  by dissolving  the alloy  off  of  t h e   Si,  measuring  the

Electrochemical polarization measurements.--Each polarized sample was masked  with  lacquer  and allowed to dry for  24h. The  electrolyte  used in this  study was made  by mixing 500 ml  distilled water  with  reagentgrade  KC1  to  obtain  a solution of  0.1N KC1. The electrolyte  was first degassed  under  vacuum  and  subsequently deaerated  with high purity nitrogen. The pH  of  the  solution  was adjusted to  8  w i t h   KOH.  The electrode was held in  t h e   m i d d l e of  t h e   flask and a magnetic  stirrer was used to vigorously  agitate  the  solution  throughout the test. The  samples were placed into  the  electrolyte  and allowed  to come  to an equilibrium corrosion  potential (EcoRR)  prior to  polarization. The potential was monitored continuously after immersion  and  EcoRR was determined when  the  change in  t h e   o p e n - c i r c u i t   potential was less than 1 mV over a  6  min  period.  A  platinum wire mesh with  a surface area  at  least ten  times  that of  t h e   w o r k i n g electrode was used as  a counterelectrode. An SCE, used as  a r e f e r e n c e electrode, was held  approximately  2 mm from  the  surface of the  working electrode, using a Luggin probe.  Potentiodynamic polarization  measurements  were  performed with a Princeton Applied Research PAR Model 273  potentiostat/galvanostat by scanning anodically or cathodically  from EcoRR  at 0.2 mV/s.

Surface  analysis.--Samples to be analyzed by XPS were  removed  from the solution  immediately  following polarization. Most,  but not all, of  t h e   samples  were rinsed in  h i g h   p u r i t y   w a t e r   a n d   d r i e d in  a n i t r o g e n   stream before  being  placed into  the  ultrahigh  vacuum (UHV)  of the  XPS  chamber  for  analysis. In  all cases,  the transfer from the  solution to  t h e   v a c u u m   chamber  took  less  than 5 min to  accomplish.

The  XPS  spectrometer, a Surface  Science  Laboratories (SSL) Model SSX  100-03,  consists of  a m o n o c h r o m a tized A1 K, x-ray  source  and a hemispherical  electron energy  analyzer with multichannel detection. A  rasterable differentially pumpable ion  gun, with  an argon  gas  handling  system, was used  for  sputtering the  alloy. The x-ray source  was focused  to  a spot  size of 600 ~m  for  the survey and  high  resolution  spectra  and to 300 ~tm for  depth profiles.

Quantitative analysis was obtained  primarily from the high  resolution measurements of  the  A1 2p,  Mo  3d,  O  ls, and C  ls  core  level  areas,  using  sensitivity  factors derived  from  the  spectra of standards using this  instru-

Table I. Sensitivity  factors  a

| Element   |   Survey spectra |   High-resolution spectra |
|-----------|------------------|---------------------------|
| A1 2p     |            0.613 |                     0.467 |
| Mo 3d     |           12.7   |                     9.82  |
| O ls d    |            2.49  |                     2.49  |

diffraction patterns that  indexed  to  an  A1  fcc  lattice structure.

Sensitivity factors include contributions from  photoelectric cross section, electron escape depth, and  analyzer transmission;  C ls  =-  1.00

- r Analyzer pass energy = 50  eV
- b  Analyzer pass  energy = 150  eV
- d  Core  level used  to  normalize A1 and  Mo sensitivity factors

ment.  These  factors are  presented in  Table  I.  Chemical state information, from the  A1 2p and  Mo  3d spectra, was obtained using  the  curve-fitting routine supplied by the manufacturer. In  the  case  of the Mo  3d spectra, the  spinorbit doublet components  were  constrained by a  3.2  eV separation and an  area  ratio of  1.5, derived from  the  spectra  of pure  Mo. The Mo  chemical  states were  identified using  published data  on  the  shifts in  binding energy  (14, 15).

## Results

Alloy  characterization.--The surface of the A1 and the A1-Mo  alloys was optically reflective without  any cloudiness, which would  have indicated contamination. Examination of  the  surface  using HSEM revealed an uneven nodule-like structure. This feature became less  pronounced  at  higher concentrations of  Mo  in  the  alloy. Figure  2  shows  the  difference in  the  surface morphology  between  a  pure  A1 film and a  film containing 2.8  a/o Mo. The grain  size for  the  pure  A1 film  was approximately 0.25 ~m; it was reduced  to  0.12  ~m with the addition of up to  6 a/o  Mo,  but was  not significantly reduced  further at higher Mo  concentrations. Figure  3a,  b shows the  microstructure of  a pure  A1 and an  A1-9Mo  film. The spacing between  the nodule-like structures on  the  surface in  Fig. 2  suggests that these  features are  individual grains that were formed  during  deposition of the alloy.

To determine the  metallurgical stability of  the  alloys at room temperature, the  alloys were characterized using XRD  and TEM  as  a  function of  time over several months. There  was no evidence of  A1-Mo  intermetallic phase  formation  during  this time.  Glancing-angle XRD  revealed that  the  Mo  was  in solid  solution with A1  in the asdeposited films, and it remained in this state during  storage  at  room temperature. For  each  alloy, A1 diffraction peaks  were  shifted to  higher angles, indicating that the Mo  atom  had  substitutionally replaced A1 in  the  face  center  cubic  (fcc) lattice, thereby  decreasing the lattice parameter. SAD  patterns (Fig. 3c,  d)  p r o d u c e d   sharp  ring

<!-- image -->

Electrochemical behavior.--After immersing  each  alloy  in the electrolyte, the  change  in  corrosion potential was monitored  as  a function of time. In  the  case  of  the pure  A1 films, the  potential fell from  its initial value  toward more active potentials, asymptotically approaching  the  equilibrium EcoRR.  The behavior of the A1-Mo  alloy films was  quite different, with  the  potential decreasing immediately after exposure  to  the  solution, until it reached  a  minimum, at  which  point it began  to  increase  asymptotically from more active potentials toward the  EcoRR.  These differences are  illustrated inFig. 4. After  lh  in  the  solution, the  potential of  both  the  pure  A1 and A1-Mo  films  leveled off  at  the  EcoRR.  The EcoRR for each  alloy was a function of  the  Mo  concentration (Fig. 5).  It  increased from -1450 mV  (SCE),  for  pure  A1, to above -1000  mV  (SCE),  for 2.8  a/o  Mo. The effect of  Mo on EcoRR is  less pronounced  above  3  a/o  with  the  slope  of the  curve  in  Fig.  5 decreasing at  higher  Mo  concentrations.

The presence  of  Mo  in  the  alloy also  affects the  response  of  the  A1-Mo  alloy during  cathodic polarization. The cathodic Tafel  slope  Pc  for  several films containing different levels of  Mo  are  listed in  Table  II. The Tafel slope  for  pure A1 was twice  the  value  of  that  for  the A1-Mo  alloys. Furthermore, the  Tafel slope  of  the  A1-Mo alloys was independent of  the  Mo  concentration for  the alloy compositions tested. The behavior of  EcoRR and Pc indicates that Mo  on  the  surface of the  sputter-deposited film  affects the  cathodic half-reaction at  the  surface of the electrode.

The addition of  Mo  to  A1 also  dramatically affected the anodic  polarization behavior  of  the  alloy. As shown in Fig.  6,  the  addition of Mo  in  solid solution with  A1 drove the  breakdown potential for  pitting (Eb)  to  more noble potentials. The Eb was found  to  be  a  function of  the  Mo  in the  alloy, becoming  more electropositive with  increasing Mo  content. Figure  6  shows the  dependence  of  Eb on  Mo concentration, i.e., it  increased  monotonically  with higher concentrations of  Mo. For  this work,  the  presence of  Mo in  solid solution with  A1 improved  the alloy's resistance  to localized attack  in chloride  containing solutions.

Surface characterization.--High-resolution XPS  spectra  of the  Mo  3d and A1 2p photoelectron peaks of  an A1-7Mo  alloy  before  immersion,  after equilibration at EcoRR,  and  at  the  breakdown  potential are  shown in  Fig. 7. The air-formed oxide  contains very  little Mo; nearly all the  Mo  detected on the  surface is  in the metallic state in the  alloy below the  oxidized film. The ratio  of metallic Mo to  metallic A1 is  close to  that expected  from  the  bulk concentrations for  each  alloy examined.  The oxidized Mo  in  the  air-formed passive film, which is  in  the  Mo +4

Fig.  2.  Surface of a) pure AI and  b)  AI with 6 a/o  Mo  in solid solution after  RF-magnetron sputter-deposition.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  3.  Microstructure of a) pure AI and b)  AI-9Mo  thin  films  after  ion milling  revealing  grain  size and morphology. Selected area diffraction  patterns  for  c)  pure AI and  d)  AI-9Mo  showing ring diffraction  patterns that  index to the  AI-fcc  structure.  No  additional  rings or spots that  would  indicate the presence  of precipitates  are  evident.

<!-- image -->

state, also  scales with  the  bulk  concentration. However, the  proportion of  Mo +4  to  A1  +3  in  t h e   a i r - f o r m e d   p a s s i v e film  is  m u c h less  t h a n   t h a t   f o u n d in  t h e   a l l o y , i.e., only approximately  one tenth  of  the  ratio of  Mo O  to  A1  ~ T h i s low value  suggests  that the  A1 is  preferentially oxidized when  the  alloy is  r e m o v e d   f r o m  t h e   d e p o s i t i o n   c h a m b e r and allowed  to  come into  contact  with the  atmosphere.

Exposing  the A1-Mo  alloys to  t h e   c h l o r i d e - c o n t a i n i n g electrolyte  further oxidizes the  surface, as  i n d i c a t e d by the  decrease in  t h e   m e t a l l i c A1 peak,  relative to  t h e   oxidized  A1 peak (Fig. 7).  D u r i n g   t h i s period  of  change  and growth in  the  passive film, the  Mo  concentration in  t h e oxidized film also increased  slightly. In  general, increased  amounts of  b o t h   m e t a l l i c and oxidized  Mo  (relative  to  t h e   m e t a l l i c , Fig.  8,  a n d  o x i d i z e d , Fig.  9, A1  concentrations)  corresponded with a slow increase  in  the open-circuit potential, an effect similar to  t h a t   o b s e r v e d for  t h e   b u l k Mo  concentrations (Fig. 5).

The  chemistry of  t h e   o x i d i z e d films, which  appears independent of  applied  potential, resembles a boehmite

Table II. Cathodic  Tafel  slope

|   [Mo] (a/o) | Eco~R (mV vs. SCE)   |   ~. (mV/decade) |
|--------------|----------------------|------------------|
|          0   | -1405                |              173 |
|          2.8 | -1002                |               72 |
|          5.4 | - 953                |               83 |
|          7.1 | - 877                |               68 |
|         10.4 | - 883                |               69 |

phase (the  aluminum  oxyhydroxide, with  an oxygen-tooxidized  A1 ratio of  two)  for  alloys with  bulk  Mo  concentrations below 9 a/o.  It  is  similar to  t h e   c h e m i s t r y of  t h e passive  film  seen  for  pure  A1 immersed  in  dilute sulfate solutions (16), rather  than  the more  thermodynamically stable trihydroxide  phase (1). In  contrast, the  oxygen-tooxidized  A1  ratio for  t h e   9 a/o  alloys  was consistently near 2.5,  indicating  a  film composition between the oxyhydroxide and  the trihydroxide  phases.  The  reason for  t h e   c h a n g e in  t h e   film  c o m p o s i t i o n   with  increasing Mo  levels in the  alloy is  u n c l e a r at  t h i s time.

During polarization, the  oxidized film  grows  thicker until  the  metallic A1 signal is  n e a r l y   c o m p l e t e l y   attenuated (Fig.  7).  Because  of an inability to uniquely fit a curve with four  independent  pairs of  p e a k s ,   it is  difficult to  q u a n t i f y   the  individual  oxidized states of  Mo.  However,  the  data clearly show  that  the  higher  oxidation states (Mo +5  and Mo +6)  are  restricted to  t h e   t h i c k e r films (Fig.  10).  The total amount  of  oxidized  Mo  [Mo~ in  t h e passive  film, increased  with film  thickness,  but always remained  much below the amount  in  the  bulk  (typically 2-3% of  the  [Mo~ relative to  [AI~ The metallic Mo  concentration at  t h e   oxidized film-alloy interface also  increased  for  heavily  oxidized surfaces, with  a buildup  of up to  two to  three times  the  bulk  Mo~ ~  r a t i o .

The rapid increase of the  current density during anodic  polarization at  t h e   Eb was associated with  the  formation of  several visible pits  on the  surface of  t h e   alloy. HSEM of  t h e   surface of  a n   A1-5Mo  alloy that had been polarized to the Eb shows  one large  pit  (5 ~tm diam) and several  smaller pits  s t a r t i n g ; these  appear to  i n i t i a t e in

Fig.  4.  The  functional dependence  of  potential on the  time  of  exposure of the working  electrode to the 0.1N  KCI  electrolyte  for  pure AI and an AI-5.8  Mo  alloy.

<!-- image -->

the  dark  regions of the photomicrograph (Fig. 11). X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) of  these  areas shows that the  dark  regions have  been  preferentially depleted of  A1,  leaving behind  much of the Mo  that was initially present in  the  film. The ratio of A1/Mo  in  the light area, 10.6,  was considerably higher than  in  the  adjacent dark  region, 7.9  (Fig. llb, c). Pits and  films depleted of  A1 are typical features  only of A1-Mo alloys  that  have undergone  pitting; they  are  not  found  below  Eb.  For  example,  HSEM analysis of  an  Al-13Mo film  polarized to  0 V (SCE) showed no surface degradation.

## Discussion

The  results  of the electrochemistry and  surfacesensitive spectroscopy indicate that Mo  plays  an  active role  in  controlling the  corrosion behavior  of  A1-Mo  alloys. The change  in  the  corrosion potential of  the  alloy increases with  the  amount of  Mo  found in  the  passive film. This  increase remains  a  small  fraction of  the  level of Mo in  the  alloy, but  is  sufficient to  impact  its corrosion behavior and improve  its resistance to  localized attack.

<!-- image -->

15

Fig.  6.  The  effect  of the average  Me  content in  the alloy  on the Eb determined  from a rapid  increase  in  the  current  density during  potentiodynamic  polarization.

<!-- image -->

The effect of  Mo in  the  passive film on  the  electrochemical response  of  the  alloy was observed  by the  change  in the  potential with  time  after the  electrode was immersed into the  deaerated 0.1N  KC1  electrolyte. Initially, the  potential of  the  A1-Mo  alloy becomes more electronegative after exposure  to  the  solution. This  behavior is  similar to a pure  A1 electrode in  the  same solution (Fig. 4).  However, the  potential of  the  alloy  electrode begins  to  increase  after several minutes  in  the  solution, as  the  air-

([

<!-- image -->

I

I

"

I

Fig.  7. The  results  of high-resolution XPS  on the surface of  on oilformed passive  film, o possive film  formed  after exposure to the electrolyte  at EcoFm, and a film  at  the breakdown potential, for  both the AI 2p and Mo  3d peaks.  The AI  2p state  contains two peaks  corresponding to the metallic (dashed) end  the oxidized  (dotted) states. On  the other hand, Mo may  contain up to  four different  valence  states: metallic (dashed),  Mo +4 (dotted), Mo §  (long  dashed),  and Mo +6 (short dashdot). Each state of Mo  contains  two peaks due to the doublet of  the valence state.  The  size and  shape  of the second peak is  dependent upon the height and  area of  the  first peak.

Fig. 10. The  increase in  the film  thickness correlated with an  increase in  the  amount of Mo +5 and Mo +6  found  in  the passive film. These two states were  not found  in  films less than 20~, thick.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig.  8.  XPS  data showing  the dependence of  EcoRR  on the ratio of  the area under  the metallic  Mo peak  to the area under  the metallic  AI peak. The  behavior of  EcoRR  with increasing Mo o  at  the surface  is similar  to  the bulk concentration shown in Fig. 5.

concentration  in  the  bulk of  t h e   alloy, whereas Fig.  8 shows  the  Mo  concentration  near the passive film. Very little Mo  builds up at  the  passive film-metal interface, except  in  the  case  where a relatively thick  passive film  develops.  The  amount  of  Mo  in  the  passive film,  determined  by the Mo +4 to A1  +3 ratio, also increases  with higher  Mo  content  in  the  alloy, but  continues to  b e  approximately  one-tenth of  t h e   r a t i o of  Mo o  to  A1  ~  f o u n d   in the  bulk.  It  is  t h e   Mo  in  t h e   p a s s i v e film, which is  governed  by the  concentration of Mo in the  alloy, that  determines  the  electrochemical  response of  t h e   alloy.

The effect of Mo  in the  passive film  on EcoRR can  result from its interaction with either the  anodic  or  cathodic reactions  at  the  surface of the electrode. Each  reaction must be considered to  d e t e r m i n e   how  the Mo  may  affect the  corrosion behavior  of  the  alloy. In  m i l d l y   alkaline solutions (pH &lt; 8.5), the  overall anodic  half-reaction on  an aluminum surface will  be the  formation of  t h e   p a s s i v e film

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whereas the  cathodic  half-reaction will  be the  decomposition of  w a t e r   to  f o r m   h y d r o x y l   i o n s   and  hydrogen  gas

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

formed film  is  replaced by a film  that is  m o r e  s t a b l e in  t h e solution, whereas the  potential measured on the pure A1 electrode  continues  to fall.  Eventually,  each  surface reaches  an equilibrium condition  with  the  electrolyte and the  potential stabilizes at  ECORR.  The film  that  forms on the  A1 and the  A1-Mo  alloy are  similar in  t h a t each  has increased  in  thickness  over  the  air-formed film.  However,  the growth of  t h e   p a s s i v e film  of  t h e   A1-Mo  alloys is accompanied by an  increase in  t h e   concentration of Mo  +4 in  t h e   film.  Therefore, the  electrochemical  response of the  A1-Mo electrode correlates with a  small but significant  increase in  t h e   concentration of Mo  in  the passive  film  (Fig. 7).  T h i s   r e s u l t suggests  that  the  difference in  the  transient  behavior of  t h e   p o t e n t i a l of  e a c h electrode is  r e l a t e d to  a n  i n c r e a s e of  Mo  in the  passive film, which affects the  corrosion behavior  of  the  alloy.

As the  Mo  concentration increases in  t h e   p a s s i v e film, ECORR is  d r i v e n to  m o r e   n o b l e   potentials. It  r i s e s quickly at  first, but  then tapers  off  after the  Mo  concentration in the  alloy  reaches  several  percent (Fig.  5  a n d  8).  The difference  between  the figures is  t h a t Fig.  5 shows  the  Mo

Fig.  9.  XPS  data showing  the  dependence of  EcoeR  on the ratio of  the area under  the oxidized Mo  peak to  the oxidized AI peak.

<!-- image -->

The general  corrosion of  a l u m i n u m   in  d e a e r a t e d   alkaline  solutions is  l i m i t e d by the  dissolution of  t h e   p a s s i v e film. The  presence  of  Mo  in  the  film  may, in  some  way, limit the  dissolution. This  effect would be evident  by a decrease  in the  passive  current  density (ip)measured during polarization. In the case of the A1-6Mo alloy shown in  Fig.  1,  the  ip is  o n e - t h i r d of  t h e   v a l u e of  t h e   pure A1. A  decrease  in  ip  would result in  a n  i n c r e a s e in EcoRR, since the  equilibrium  between  the  cathodic  and  anodic reactions  would shift to higher  potentials,  due to the Tafel  slope  of  the  cathodic  reaction (Fig.  12).  However, the change  in  i, is  n o t   s u f f i c i e n t to  significantly increase EcoRR, since  the  cathodic Tafel  slope  is  shallow  for  the A1-Mo  alloys (70  m V / d e c a d e ) .   T h e r e f o r e , a large  change in  t h e   EcoR~ will  require a substantial  change in  ip.

The Mo  in  the passive film  m a y   also  affect the  cathodic half-reaction by either increasing  the exchange  current density for  t h e   c a t h o d i c reaction, or  d e c r e a s i n g   t h e cathodic  Tafel  slope. In  t h e   s i t u a t i o n where  the cathodic halfreaction is  t h e   d e c o m p o s i t i o n of  w a t e r   to  f o r m  h y d r o x y l ions  and  hydrogen  gas,  one step  in  the  reaction is  t h e   recombination  of  the adsorbed  hydrogen  atoms on the  surface  of the  electrode. Molybdenum is  a k n o w n   catalyst for  t h e   r e c o m b i n a t i o n of  a d s o r b e d   h y d r o g e n , with  an  exchange current density (io)  five  o r d e r s   of m a g n i t u d e greater  than A1 (17). In  l i g h t of  t h i s   change,  even  small additions of Mo to  the  alloy would quickly  increase ECORR, since  the  large  increase in  t h e   e x c h a n g e   current  density would result in  a  s i g n i f i c a n t shift in  t h e   cathodic reaction to higher  current  densities (Fig.  12),  t h e r e b y   substantially increasing EcoRR. Once sufficient Mo  is  p r e s e n t   on the  surface to  c o n t r o l   t h e recombination  of  adsorbed  hydrogen,  an increase in  t h e   M o   concentration in  t h e   f i l m would be expected  to  have  less  of  an affect on the EcoRR, since  the  exchange  current  density would increase only

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

as  a function of  the  coverage  of Mo on the  surface. This model  would explain  the  rapid rise in  ECORR  with  small additions  of Mo as well as  its diminishing  effect on increasing ECORR  at  higher  Mo  concentrations in  the  alloy.

The effect of Mo  on  the  cathodic  half-reaction is  further  shown  by the  change in  the  cathodic Tafel  slope of pure A1 and the  AI-Mo  alloys. The Tafel  slope  for  A1 is more than  twice  the  slope  of  the  A1-Mo  alloys. Additionally, once sufficient Mo  has been added to  the  A1, the Tafel  slope remains  independent  of  the  Mo  concentration. The decrease  in  the  Tafel  slope  for  the  alloy  may also  contribute to  the  rise in ECORR , as shown in  Fig.  12. However, it  alone  cannot  explain the  continued  dependence of  EcoR~ on the  Mo  concentration above the  initial rise. Rather,  the decrease  in the cathodic  Tafel  slope implies that the  rate limiting step  governing the  cathodic half-reaction of  A1 differs from that  of  the  A1-Mo  alloys, since  the  cathodic Tafel  slope  can  be related to  a  c h a n g e in  t h e   r e a c t i o n process  through  the  transfer coefficient (18).

The addition of Mo to  the  passive film  alters the  electrochemical response  of  A1 at  the  equilibrium eorrosion potential. The difference in  the  r e s p o n s e   of  A1 and A1-Mo provides  little direct information regarding the  protective nature  of  the  passive film  in  chloride-containing solutions  at more  noble potentials. However, during passivation, the  same reaetions occur  at  the  surface  of the  electrodes.  One aspect  of  pitting in  A1 is  that the  pit propagation is  l i m i t e d by the  evolution of  h y d r o g e n   (2). The strong  dependence of  the  cathodic  reaction on the presence  of Mo in  the  alloy suggests that  this  alloying element  may actually increase the  propagation  of  a pit,

Fig.  11.  Stereomicrograph of  the  pitted  surface of  an AI-5.4  Mo  alloy after  the electrode  was polarized  to  the pitting potential  revealing a) the lift-off of  the alloy  film  from  the  Si substrote.  KCI crystals also are present on the surface,  b) Isolated  regions of  the  alloy  near  the pit are dark where  AI has been leached from  the film and contain c)  a small  pit that  has formed on a grain  boundary.

<!-- image -->

once the  pit  has nucleated, since  Mo  is  expected  to  promote the  recombination  of  hydrogen.  This  leads  to  the

Fig. 12. Diagram  showing the effect  of increasing the hydrogen  recombination  exchange current density (io) and  the  cathodic Tafel  slope (13c) on ECORR.

<!-- image -->

conclusions that (i) it is  the  Mo  in  the  passive film that controls the pitting behavior of  the  alloy and (ii) Mo does not  impede  the  growth  of  the pit but, rather, inhibits pit nucleation.

The passive  film  that forms during  exposure  to  the electrolyte contains both  A1  +3  and Mo  +4  states, is thicker than  the  film formed  when the  alloy was first exposed  to air, and is an oxyhydroxide phase  for  alloys containing less than  9  a/o  Mo. Polarizing the  alloy up  to Eb further increases the  thickness of  the  passive film. The presence of the  higher  oxidation states of  Mo  in  the  passive film  is dependent  on the thickness of  the  oxide  film  (Fig. 10). The  Mo +5  and  Mo +6  states  may be  a  result  of the  formation of oxychlorides or  oxides; however,  the low sensitivity of  the  XPS  measurement  to  C1 (as  opposed  to  Mo) and the low concentration of  the  Mo +5  and Mo +~  in  the  film  make it difficult to  distinguish between the two  possibilities. Furthermore,  oxidation states other than  Mo +4  do not consistently appear  in the passive film  during  polarization, even  at the breakdown  potential, and,  therefore, do not  seem to  be  necessary for  inhibiting pitting in  A1.

The addition of  molybdates  to  solutions containing chlorides have  shown a  similar electrochemical response (6)  as  the  A1-Mo  films. Furthermore, Mo  was found  in both  the  Mo +4 and Mo +6 states for  the  a l u m i n u m  protected by the  inhibitor, indicating that  the  molybdate had been  reduced  during the formation of the passive film, and  possibly competitively displaced the C1anion. However,  it appears from  this work that the  reduction of Mo  is  not a major  factor in  the  inhibition process.

## Conclusion

The results of  our work  show that the  presence of  Mo in  solid solution with  aluminum  produces an  alloy that is resistant to  pitting attack. Increasing the  concentration of  Mo  in  the  alloy drives the  critical pitting potential electropositive. The  Mo in the  alloy was found  to catalyze the  cathodic half-reaction a d  produce  a  rapid increase in the EcoRR with  Mo  concentration. The influence of  Mo on  increasing the exchange current density for  hydrogen recombination suggests that the Mo  in the alloy does  not inhibit  he  growth  of  pits, but, rather, controls their nucleation in  the  passive film at  the  electrode surface.

## Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge  A.  J.  Sedriks and the  support of the  Office of  Naval  Research  under  Contract  no. N00014-85-C-0638.  In addition, the authors would  like to  thank  S. Duncan for growing  the  alloy films used  in  this program  and G. Cote  for  his  assistance on the  XPS  analysis of  the  passive film.

Manuscript submitted Oct.  9, 1986; revised manuscript received April 30,  1987.

Martin  Marietta Laboratories assisted in  meeting  the publication costs of  this article.

## REFERENCES

1.  M. Pourbaix, "Atlas of  Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions,"  Pergamon Press, Ltd., Brussels (1966).
2.  H.  Lee  Craig, Jr. and  J. R.  Scott, J. Mater., 4, 540 (1969).
3.  H. Kaesche, in  "Passivity in  Metals," R. P. Frankenthal and  J.  Kruger, Editors, p.  935,  The Electrochemical Society, Princeton, NJ (1978).
4.  R. T. Foley, Corrosion  (Houston), 42(5), 277  (1986).
5.  M. S.  Vukasovich  and J. P. G.  Farr, Mater.  Perform., 25(5), 9 (1986).
6.  R.  R.  Wiggle,  V. Hospadaruk,  and E.  A.  Styloglou, ibid., 20(6), 13  (1981).
7.  R.  C. McCune,  R.  L. Shilts, and  S. M. Ferguson, CorTos. Sei., 22,  1049  (1982).
8. J. Augustynski,  in "Passivity in Metals,"  R.  P. Frankenthal and  J.  Kruger, Editors, p.  973, The Electrochemical Society, Princeton, NJ (1978).
9.  A.  Kh. Bairamow, S.  Zakipour, and  C.  Leygraf, Corros. Sci., 25, 69 (1985).
10.  A. H.  A1-Saffer,  V. Ashworth,  A.  K.  O.  Bairamov, D.  J. Chivers, W. A.  Grant, and R.  P.  M. Procter, Corros. Sci., 20,  127  (1980).
11.  P.  M. Natishan, E.  McCafferty, and G. K. Hubler, This Journal, 133, 1061 (1986).
12.  W.  C.  Moshier, G. D. Davis,  J.  S.  Ahearn,  and  H.  F. Hough, ibid., 133,  1063  (1986).
13.  J.  Bentley, L. D. Stephenson, R.  B.  Benson,  P.  A. Parrish, and  J.  K.  Hirvonen, Material Resources  Society  Symposium  Proceedings, Vol. 27, p. 151, Elsevier Science  Publishing Co.,  Inc., New  York (1984).
14. D. S. Zingg,  L.  E.  Makovsky, R.  E.  Tischer, F. R. Brown, and  D. M. Hercules, J.  Phys.  Chem., 84(22), 2899 (1980).
15.  A.  Cimino  and  B.  A.  De Angeles, J.  Catal. 36,  11  (1975).
16.  W. C.  Moshier, G. D.  Davis, and  J. S.  Ahearn,  accepted by Corros. Sci.
17.  J. West,  "Electrodeposition and Corrosion Processes,"p. 56,  Van Nostrand-Reinhold, London (1971).
18.  J.  O'M. Bockris and A.  K.  N.  Reddy,  "Modern  Electrochemistry," Vol. 2, p. 1080, Plenum Publishing Corp., New  York (1977).
19.  A.  J.  Forty, S.  M. E1-Mashri, R.  G.  Jones, R.  Dupree, and  I. Farnan, European  Conference on  Application of  Surface Interface Analysis, The Netherlands, Oct. 14-18, 1985.