<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

o r

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To obtain a chosen accuracy of  R  the number of terms N  has to fulfill

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4.  T.  P.  Hoar, ibid., 5,  279 (1965).
6.  J.  T.  Waber, ibid., 101, 271  (1954).
5. M. A.  Streicher, This  Journal, 103, 375  (1956).
7.  J.  A. Simmons, S. R. Coriell, and F. Ogburn, ibid., 114,  782 (1967).
9.  J.  O. Hirschfelder, C. F. Curtiss, and R. B. Bird, "Molecular  Theory of Gases and Liquids," John Wiley  &amp; Sons,  Inc., New  York (1954).
8.  E.  K e n n a r d  and J.  T.  Waber, ibid., 117,  880  (1970).
10.  J.  Happel and H. Brenner,  "Low  Reynolds  Number Hydrodynamics,"  Prentice Hall,  Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N. J.  (1965).

## Effects  of Molybdenum on  the Pitting  Potentials of Ferritic Stainless Steels  at Various  Temperatures

## A.  P.  Bond*

Research  Laboratory, Climax  Molybdenum Company  of  Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan  48106

## ABSTRACT

Pitting potential measurements were performed  by  potentiodynamic scanning  at  200 mV/hr  in  1M  NaC1  and in  1M  NaBr, each saturated with nitrogen. Over the  entire temperature range  studied, 1~176 molybdenum  additions up to  the  limit of  solid solubility caused  a continuous  increase in the  pitting potentials of 18%  Cr ferritic stainless steels. Exposure tests were also  performed in various  chloride-containing environments,  and  it  was  found that  pitting rate  decreased as  the  molybdenum  content  increased.

It has  been  suggested that at low  temperatures molybdenum  additions may  not be beneficial to the pitting resistance of  austenitic stainless  steels exposed to  chloride solutions (1). Data have  also  been presented indicating that  above room temperature, the  beneficial effects of molybdenum  on  resistance to pitting may decrease  (2).  Furthermore, it  has been reported  that

*  Electrochemical Society  Active  Member. Key words: corrosion, polarization.

molybdenum  additions are ineffective in sodium bromide solutions (2, 3).

In  view of  the  present  interest in  molybdenum-containing ferritic stainless  teels, it  was  thought  important  to  investigate these  questions and establish more clearly the range  of  conditions under which molybdenum  content  has a favorable effect on pitting resistance of  ferritic stainless  teels. To do this, pitting potential measurements were undertaken  on a series of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since/*total &lt;~ 1,  R  will  always  be R  &lt; 0.1  and therefore  condition  [A-B-11] is  sufficient.

Manuscript  submitted  April  3,  1972; revised  manuscript received Dec.  14,  1972.

Any discussion of this paper  will appear  in  a Discussion Section  to be  published  in the December  1973 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  N.  D.  Tomashov, "Theory  of  Corrosion  and Protection  of  Metals," p. 154,  McMillan Co.,  New  York (1966).
3. I.  L.  Rosenfeld  and I.  S. Danilov, Corrosion  Sci., 7, 129 (1967).
2. H. H.  Uhlig,  Proceedings  2nd  Inter.  Congress on Metallic Corrosion, NACE,  1966,  p.  1.

18%  chromium steels containing 0-5%  Mo. These measurements  were made  in 1M  NaC1  and 1M  NaBr  over a  temperature  range from  1  ~  to 70~ Concurrently, some exposure  tests were performed  in  various  media containing chlorides or  bromides.

## Experimental

The  experimental alloys  were produced by  induction-melting in  an  argon atmosphere  using  the  splitheat  technique. By  this  technique,  the base composition  was melted  and part  of  the  melt  was poured  off  to produce  an ingot. To the balance  of  the  melt,  the  required  molybdenum  addition was made  and the next ingot was cast. This  process  was repeated until the  desired  compositions were cast.  By  this  procedure,  the impurity  levels were held  nearly  constant within  each series. The  compositions  of the steels  produced are given  in  Table  I.

The resulting ingots were hot-forged and hot-rolled to  0.76  cm  thick  strips and then  cold-rolled to  0.38 cm thickness. All  strips were given  a 1-hr  anneal  at  815~ and water-quenched  before  the test  specimens were prepared.

The electrodes for  the potentiodynamic studies were mounted in epoxy plastic with a single  exposed surface parallel to the rolling plane.  Electrical contact was made by  soft-soldering a nickel  wire  to  the  back of the electrode. Contact  between the  solder or lead wire and the electrolyte was  excluded  by the plastic and glass tube. The 0.5  by 0.6  cm  exposed  surface was polished by using  standard  metallographic techniques, finishing with  a distilled water  slurry of  0.3~  alumina. The  edges of the electrode were masked  with clear Glyptal varnish to  prevent crevice corrosion.

The coupons for  the exposure tests, 2.5 by  2.5 by 0.3  cm, were surface ground  and then  polished through No. 600 wet silicon carbide  paper.  They were solvent degreased  and rinsed  in methanol before  exposure.

The  potentiodynamic  scanning experiments were performed  using  standard  equipment and techniques. The  platinum auxiliary electrode was  isolated from the  test  solution  by means of  a glass  flit. The solution used  was  nitrogen-saturated 1.0M  NaC1  or 1.0M NaBr. All  potential measurements were made  using  a saturated calomel reference  electrode. The  scans were started at --0.7V  and continued in the  noble  direction at  200 mV/hr. The temperature was controlled within m0.5~ of  the  reported temperature.  Below  room temperature an ice  bath  was used,  while  the  elevated temperatures  were  maintained  by  a  heating  mantle and temperature controller.

## Results and  Discussion

A  typical pitting potential determination is  shown in Fig.  1.  It  can be seen  that  the  current rise  corresponding  to  pitting is  extremely  sharp.  This  was true  at  all temperatures  investigated. It can  also be  seen that very  short  pulses  of  current were sometimes  observed as the  pitting potential was  approached.  As  discussed previously  (4),  these  pulses  correspond  to formation of  very  tiny  pits that  do not  propagate  if  the  potential scan is stopped below the pitting potential for time periods up to  24  hr.

The effect of variation in  the  rate of potential scan was checked  for  the 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  alloy  (Table II).

Table I. Compositions of steels tested

|                                     | Composition (%)                | Composition (%)                | Composition (%)        | Composition (%)       | Composition (%)     | Composition (%)            | Composition (%)            |
|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Desig- nation                       | Cr                             | Mo                             | Ni                     | Si                    | Mn                  | C                          | N                          |
| 4354A 4354B 4354C 4354D 4354E 4073A | 17,61 NA (a) NA NA 17.31 18.45 | 0.035 0.96 2.06 3.51 4.67 1.97 | 0.091 NA NA NA NA 0.II | 0.22 NA NA NA NA 0.13 | 0.55 NA NA NA NA -- | 0.028 NA NA NA 0.031 0.034 | 0.032 NA NA NA 0.033 0.045 |

Fig.  1.  Polarization  curve  obtained on scanning a masked electrode of alloy  4354D  (3.5% Mo  at 200  mV/hr  in  nitrogen-saturated  1.0M NaCI  at  70~

<!-- image -->

No  significant difference in pitting potential was  obtained  when  the  scan rate  was  increased from 200 to 2000 mV/hr. This  is  in  contrast to  results obtained  in  a previous  study of  an 18% Cr-14% Ni-3%  Mo austenitic steel (4).  This  austenitic steel showed a significant decrease in  pitting potential as  scan  rate  increased. In general, it  has  been observed  that  pitting potentials of  ferritic steels are  less  affected by variations in  experimental  conditions than are pitting potentials of austenitic steels of  similar chromium and molybdenum content.

After  each run,  the electrode was  examined under the  microscope. Only if  well-developed pits, away from the masked  edges,  were present  was  a run accepted as  valid. In  many  cases, there  was simultaneous attack at  the  edges  where crevices may  have existed, but  this was  disregarded  if distinct pits were  visible. The crevice  attack  was  more  likely to occur as the test temperature decreased. At 70~ most electrodes were free  of any crevice  attack, while at I~ most electrodes  suffered crevice attack  as well  as pitting. This effect may  be partially a result of  the  physical properties  of the  Glyptal mask, which tended to be brittle at  low  temperatures.

When  pitting occurred, a large  number of  pits  were usually  found.  If  the scan was  stopped  at this  point, but without the potentiostat switched off,  the pits would continue  to grow  until  the electrode was  destroyed.

Results  of  the  tests in  1M  NaC1  are  shown in  Fig.  2. While temperature  had a very large  effect on pitting potentials of  these  alloys, it  is  striking  that the  effect of molybdenum  was  nearly  the same  at each  of  the test  temperatures. Thus, over the temperature  range studied, molybdenum  exerts a definite beneficial effect on pitting potentials. Note that  an  increase in  the  pitting  potential in  the  noble direction  corresponds to  an increase  in resistance to pitting corrosion. However, the  pitting potentials of  the  4.7%  Mo  alloy did  tend  to be lower than those  observed  for  the 3.5%  Mo  steel. Since  this difference was observed  at  each  temperature, it  appears  to  be a true  effect and not  the  result of  experimental variation.

A  similar tendency  for  a maximum in  pitting potential to  occur  at  intermediate molybdenum  content  was also observed for an  austenitic stainless steel  series (4).  This behavior  in the  austenitic series was  attri-

Table II. Effect  of scanning rate on pitting  potential  of the 18%  Cr-2%  Mo  alloy  (4354C) in  N2 saturated  1M  NaCI  at  45~

| 200mV/hr                | 2000mV/hr                |
|-------------------------|--------------------------|
| 0.OSV (SCE) 0.00V (sCE) | 0.02V (SCE) 0.085V (SCE) |

MOLYBDENUM

<!-- image -->

CONTENT

(%)

Fig.  2. Pitting  potentials  obtained  from  potentiodynamic polarization scans  at 200  mY/hr  in nitrogen-saturated 1.0M  NaCl.

buted to the occurrence  of a  second phase  at  high molybdenum contents. In  the  present series of  ferritic steels, a second  phase also  occurs  in  the  high  molybdenum steels. According  to  the  work of  McMullin  et aL (5),  at  815~ this  phase  is  chi,  a compound  containing  about  25%  Mo,  18% Cr,  and the  balance  iron. According  to  the  phase  diagram,  at  815~ the  maximum solubility of  molybdenum is  about  3.5% in  18%  Cr-Fe (5). Thus,  the  4.7% Mo  alloy does  not  have any more molybdenum  dissolved in the matrix than does the 3.5%  Mo alloy.  Examination  of the microstructures of  the  steels annealed  at  815~ indicated  that a very small  amount of  chi  was present in the 3.5% Mo  steel and a large  amount in the 4.7%  Mo  steel  (Fig.  3). Therefore, it  is  concluded  that  the  failure of  the  4.7% Mo  alloy to  exhibit a higher  pitting potential than  the 3.5% Mo  steel is  a consequence of  the  phase  constitution of  the  alloys. The slight decrease in  pitting potential that  was  apparently observed  could either  indicate  that chi  itself is  not  as  resistant as the  matrix  to pitting or  that the  chi-ferrite interface forms  preferential pitting sites. In  any event, the  decrease in  pitting potential of  the  4.7% Mo  steel as  compared to  the  3.5% Mo  steel was too  small to be of  practical significance.

In  an effort to  avoid  the  chi  phase,  the  three  alloys with  the  highest molybdenum  content  were annealed at 980~ and water-quenched. Microscopic  examination  confirmed  that  all of  these  steels did not  contain appreciable chi  after treatment. However, the  pitting potentials found  in  1.0M NaC1  at  25~ were  considerably  reduced by the  980~  treatment (Table III).

It  is  known  that  this  heat-treatment also  sensitizes these steels to  intergranular corrosion (6). It  is thought that  the  intergranular corrosion is  the  result of  precipitation of carbides and nitrides rich  in  chromium and molybdenum, causing  depletion of  the  adjacent matrix (7). Thus,  it is  to  be  expected that  steels heat-treated so as  to  be  sensitive to intergranular corrosion would

-

5

Fig. 3. Structure  (islands  of chl in a  ferrite  matrix)  of the  18% Cr-S% Mo alloy (4354E) annealed 1  hr  at  815~ and waterquenched;  500

<!-- image -->

be more  susceptible to pitting corrosion than would properly annealed  steels, as  was recently reported for 26%  Cr ferritic alloys  (8).  A  similar effect has been observed  for  austenitic stainless steels exposed  in ferric chloride (9).

The foregoing results lead  to  the  conclusion that  the maximum  useful molybdenum content of  18%  Cr steels containing the usual  amounts of interstitial elements and  not  fully  stabilized is about 3.5%. Steels  fully stabilized by titanium or columbium additions that  tie up all carbon  and  nitrogen, or  steels of  such  low interstitial content that  carbides or  nitrides do not  precipitate, could  be annealed  at  high enough temperatures to dissolve chi  without  suffering chromium depletion because  of  carbide or  nitride precipitation. In  this case, larger  molybdenum  additions can contribute to corrosion  resistance, as was  demonstrated  in work  on high-purity 25% Cr steels containing up to 5% Mo (10).

In order  to demonstrate that  titanium stabilization can  prevent loss of pitting resistance as  well  as  sensitization to intergranular corrosion as a result of exposure  to high temperatures, the pitting potential of an 18% Cr-2%  Mo-0.5%  Ti  alloy was  determined  as a function of  h e a t - t r e a t m e n t It  was found (Table  IV)

## Table  III. Effect  of heat-treatment on  pitting  potentials  in N2-saturated 1M  NaCI  at  25~

| Heat   |   % Mo | Pitting potential, 815~ WQ   | V (SCE) 980~ WQ   |
|--------|--------|------------------------------|-------------------|
| 4354C  |    2   | 0.25 0.26                    | - 0.01            |
| 4354D  |    3.5 | 0.31                         | 0,04              |
| 4354E  |    4.7 | 0.26 0,29                    | --0.01            |

0.24

Table IV.  Effect  of heat-treatment on the pitting  potential  of Ti-stabilized 18% Cr-2% Mo  ferritic stainless  steels in nitrogen-saturated 1M  NaCI  at a scanning  rate of 2000  mV/hr  at 45~

0.53

|       | Ti content (weight)   | Pitting potential, V (SCE), afterwater quenchingfrom the indicated temperatures   | Pitting potential, V (SCE), afterwater quenchingfrom the indicated temperatures   | Pitting potential, V (SCE), afterwater quenchingfrom the indicated temperatures   |
|-------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Heat  | per cent)             | 815~                                                                              | 025~C                                                                             | 1035~                                                                             |
| 4073A | 0.47                  | 0.27 0.35 0.29                                                                    | 0.30                                                                              | 0.59 0.50                                                                         |

MOLYBDENUM

<!-- image -->

CONTENT

(%)

Fig.  4. Pitting  potentials  obtained  from  potentiodynamic  polarization  scans at 200 mV/hr  in  nitrogen-saturated  LOM HoBr.

Table VI.  Results of 30  day complete  immersion  tests  in oxygen-saturated  aqueous solutions  at  90~

|                                  | Corrosion rate (mdd) of the indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (mdd) of the indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (mdd) of the indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (mdd) of the indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (mdd) of the indicatedalloys   |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Solution                         | 4354A 0% Mo                                   | 4354B 1% Mo                                   | 4354C 2% Mo                                   | 4354D 3.5% Mo                                 | 4354E 5% Mo                                   |
| 3% NaC1 125 ppm CI-, 60 ppm Cu § | 63 95                                         | nil 0.4                                       | 0.4 0.4                                       | nil nil                                       | 0.3 0.3                                       |

As  a result of the  polarization measurements,  it is clear that molybdenum has a  beneficial effect on  pitting potentials in 1M  NaC1  over a range  at least from 1  ~ to 70~ This  result is  in  partial conflict with the  results of others  on some  austenitic steels. The conflict is  more definite  at I~ since  Horvath and Uhlig (1) found that  molybdenum  had a detrimental effect  on pitting potentials of an austenitic stainless steel series in  0.!M NaC1  at  0~ The small  differences in  experimental  conditions and technique do not appear  sufficient to explain a reversal in  direction of  pitting potential change  with  molybdenum content. Thus,  the  effect of molybdenum may  be different in  austenite than  it is in ferrite even  though  there is  no  obvious  rationalization for the difference. These  same considerations also apply  to  the  difference in  molybdenum effect on austenite and  ferrite tested in  NaBr.

that, as expected,  heat-treatment at temperatures up to 1035~  had no deleterious effect on pitting potential. In fact,  after  treatment  at 1035~ the pitting potential was  more noble  than  it  was after the  normal anneal  at  815~ It  was also  noted  that  the  titaniumcontaining alloy  had  a  more  noble pitting potential than  the titanium-free alloy under the  same conditions. Earlier work  with  this  alloy  at 25~ also  indicated that titanium was beneficial to  pitting resistance (I1).

Pitting potentials measured  in  1M  NaBr varied  with composition in  the  same way  as  in  1M  NaC1  (Fig. 4). Pitting potentials were  more  noble  in  NaBr, especially at  higher  temperatures. The beneficial effect of molybdenum additions on pitting potentials of this series of steels in  NaBr is  just as  clearly defined as  it  is in NaC1. The pitting potentials measured in 1M  NaC1  and in  1M l~aBr at 25~ indicate  that all  the steels  studied should  be  subject to pitting in 0.33M  FeCI~,  0.5M CuC12, and 0.33M FeBr3 solutions. Exposure tests  did indeed show pitting of  all the  test steels in  these  solutions  at 25~ (Table  V). In all  cases, the rate  of attack  decreased  with increasing molybdenum  content  up  to 3.5%. The behavior  of the  4.7%  Mo  steel was erratic in  these solutions.

Exposure  tests were also  performed  in  less  aggressive  media at  90~ (Table  VI).  In both  solutions, the molybdenum-free  steel was severely pitted, while  the steels containing molybdenum were attacked only  very slightly or  not  at  all. These exposure  test results were in  good qualitative agreement  with  the  pitting potential results.

Table V. Results of  exposure tests in  acidified  halide  salts  at  25~

|                                  | Corrosion rate (todd) of indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (todd) of indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (todd) of indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (todd) of indicatedalloys   | Corrosion rate (todd) of indicatedalloys   |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Medium                           | 4354A 0% Mo                                | 4354B I% Mo                                | 4354C 2% Mo                                | 4354D 3.5% Mo                              | 4354E 5% Mo                                |
| 0.33M FeC13§ 0.1N HC1            | 7200                                       | 7700                                       | 5300                                       | 670                                        | 220                                        |
| 0.33M FeBr3+                     | 920                                        | 230                                        | 120                                        | 75                                         | 140                                        |
| O.1.N I-IBr 0.5M CuCI2+ 0.1N HCI | 740                                        | 610                                        | 650                                        | 330                                        | 560                                        |

There is less  obvious  conflict in the behavior  of molybdenum-containing steels at  higher  temperatures in NaC1.  The  previously reportec~  results  (2) were obtained  by counting pits  formed at  constant current density. This involved  driving  the potential  beyond that  required to produce pitting without  determining any pitting or  breakthrough potential. It  is  quite  possible that  the number of pits  found in this  manner does not correlate at all  with pitting potentials as measured  in  the  present work.

## Conclusions

In fully annealed  (815~ 18%  Cr ferritic stainless steels, molybdenum additions up to the  limit of solid solubility increase pitting potentials. This  is  true  over the  entire temperature  range  studied i.e., 1~176 in 1M  NaCt  and 1~176 in 1M  NaBr. Heat-treatments that  sensitize the  steels to  intergranular corrosion also drastically lower the pitting potential.

Manuscript  submitted  Nov. 9,  1972; revised  manuscript received  Jan.  5, 1973.  This  was  Paper 53 presented  at  the  Cleveland, Ohio,  Meeting  of  the  Society, Oct.  3-7, 1971.

Any discussion of  this paper  will appear  in  a Discussion  Section  to be published  in the December  1973 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  J.  Horvath  and H.  H.  Uhlig, This  Journal, 115,  791 (1968).
3.  H.  H.  Uhlig  and J.  Wulff, Trans.  AIME, 135, 494 (1939).
2.  M. A.  Streicher, ibid., 103, 375  (1956).
4.  A. P. Bond  and E. A. Lizlovs, This  Journal, 115, 1130 (1968).
6.  A.  P.  Bond  and E. A. Lizlovs, This Journal, 116, 1305 (1969).
5.  J.  G. McMullin, S. F. Reiter, and D. G. Ebeling, Trans. ASM, 46, 799  (1954).
7.  A.  P.  Bond, Trans. AIME, 245,  2127 (1969).
9.  N.  D.  Tomashov, G. P. Chernova,  and O. N. Marcova, ibid., 20,  166t  (1964).
8.  C.  R.  Rarey and A. H. Aronson, Corrosion., 28,  255 (1972).
10.  E.  A. Lizlovs and A. P.  Bond, This  Journal, 118,  22 (1971).
11.  E.  A.  Lizlovs and  A. P.  Bond, ibid., 116,  574  (1969).

5