## Environmental  Factors Affecting the Critical Pitting  Potential  of  Aluminum

H. B6hni  and H. H.  Uhlig*

Department  o~  Metallurgy and Materials Science, Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, Cambridge,  Massachusetts

## ABSTRACT

The  critical pitting potential determined  potentiostatically of pure A1  in 0.1N NaC1  is  --0.40V  (SHE). This  value  is  not  greatly sensitive to temperature  (0-40~ to small  alloying additions of  Mn  or Mg,  nor to thickness of oxide  film  produced  by anodizing. The  value  is  more  active the higher  the C1- concentratiOn, but  becomes more noble  with  additions to  NaC1  of  nitrates, chromates, acetates, benzoates, or sulfates. The latter act  as  pitting inhibitors which are  effective in  the  order  as listed. Dissolved  Cu  + + in  trace  amounts deposit on the  A1 surface as  Cu which then  acts  as  an efficient cathode, shifting the corrosion potential of  aluminum to  the  critical pitting potential. Trace amounts of Fe  + + + and Pd  + + act similarly. Anodized surfaces  effectively retard  penetration of the  oxide  by Cu  + + thereby  delaying onset  of pitting, but  they  are  not  similarly effective when A1 is  coupled  to  Cu. The mechanism of pitting is interpreted in terms of competitive  adsorption of C1-  with oxygen for  sites on the  metal  surface. Extraneous  anions compete in  turn  with C1- ions, making it  necessary to shift the potential in  the  positive direction in order for  C1- to  adsorb  followed by pit  initiation. Similarities in  adsorption parameters  of various  anions other  than  C1-  on A1  and 18-8 stainless  teel are  pointed out.

Precise  determination of the  critical pitting potential of  A1  was first carried out  by Kaesche (1) using both  potentiostatic and galvanostatic techniques. He found  that  the  potential above which,  but  not  below, A1 undergoes  pitting corrosion in 1M  NaC1  is  --0.48V [std. H2  scale  (SHE)] which value  is  independent of pH  between the interval pH  2-11.  He  also  reported that  the  critical potential becomes more active  (more negative) the  higher  the  NaC1  concentration between 0.1-4.0M  NaC1.  Bond et  al. (2) measured the critical pitting potential for  zone-refined A1  in  0.5M  NaC1  in approximate  agreement  with the  corresponding value reported by  Kaesche.

Leckie  and Uhlig (3)  pointed out  that  the  cathodic protection of  aluminum, as  usually  practiced  in aerated  saline media, consists of polarizing A1  only below the critical pitting potential and  not below the open-circuit anode potential as  is required  for steel. In principle, therefore, zinc  is  a possible sacrificial anode for  this  purpose, but not  iron. For stainless  steels, on the  other hand,  pitting corrosion can be avoided  in  saline media such  as  sea  water  by coupling either iron  or  zinc, since  either metal  succeeds  in  polarizing the alloy  below its  critical pitting potential (0.21V).

In view of the importance  of the critical potential to the  application of A1  to saline environments, data are  reported herewith  on  the  effect of  temperature, of various  anions and cations, of  some alloying elements and of  inhibiting salt concentrations on observed  values.  In  addition, the  mechanism of  accelerated pitting by traces of  Cu  + +  is  discussed.

## Experimental

For most of  the  measurements, 99.99%  A1 electrodes were  employed  measuring  1.5  cm  long  and 0.4  cm  in diameter.  One end of each electrode was drilled and tapped,  allowing  a  threaded  member attached  to a nickel  wire to hold the electrode firmly  against  a glass  tube separated  by a water-tight Teflon  gasket. Only the electrode surface, totally immersed,  Teflon, and glass  made  contact  with the electrolyte. Specimens were polished  to 3/0 emery paper followed  by pickling in 2N  NaOH at 80~ for 5 min  and then washing  in  distilled water.  A  few measurements  were also  carried out on 99.4%  A1 and on alloys  of 1.3%

* Electrochemical  Society  Active  Member.

Mn-A1 and 2.4% Mg-A1  all of  which were supplied by courtesy of  the  Aluminum  Company  of  America.

The  all-glass cell  as previously described  (3) was placed  in  an  air  thermostat maintained at  25  ~ \_  0.2~ Temperatures  could  also  be maintained at  some value above or below room  temperature. At 0~ the glass cell was placed  additionally in  a water-ice bath.  The electrolyte was  deaerated  before measurements by bubbling through  it purified N2 previously passed  over Cu turnings at  400  ~ C.

The procedure  was to  polarize the  electrode anodically  within  the passive  region  for  5 min at  --0.80V vs. saturated  calomel electrode  (SCE) or  --0.56V (SHE)  using  a Wenking  potentiostat in conjunction with  a chart recorder. This  procedure achieved  steadystate conditions before  a step-by-step technique was applied  by which the  potential was increased 50 mV every  5 min and the corresponding current noted. The current  remained relatively constant  below the  approximate  critical potential V'c (&lt;1 ~A/cm2), but  increased  sharply above by two or  more orders  of  magnitude.  These  measurements in turn were  supplemented by longer  time  runs  maintaining a given  potential near  the  critical value  for  at  least 12 hr.  The least noble  value  at  which pits could  not  be observed under a  low-power microscope was  taken as  the steady-state critical potential Ve. Reproducibility of steady-state values  was better than  · mV.  All  potentials are reported  with reference to the SHE.

As a check  on some of  the  critical pitting potentials obtained  as described, immersion  tests were also  run using  pickled  specimens of 99.4% A1 measuring  1 89 x 89 x  0.065 in.  (3.8  x  1.3  x  0.17  cm). These were suspended by means of a nylon  thread  through  a hole drilled in one end of the specimen  and then placed in  closed  250 ml flasks for  a period of  1-14  days.  After the  test  period, the  number of pits  on the  two  main faces  of the  specimen,  visible under  a low-power microscope, was counted.

## Results

E~ect of temperature.--Temperatures between 0  ~ and 40~ were found  to  have very  little effect on the critical potential Ve  as results of Fig.  1 show. These data  are  in  contrast to  the  critical potentials for  18-8 stainless steel in  0.1M NaC1  which are  0.6V  more noble at  0~ than  at  25~ (3). In  other  words,  18-8  stainless

Fig.  1. Critical pitting potentials of  99.99% AI  in  0.1M NaCI as a function of temperature.

<!-- image -->

steel  is  much  more  resistant to pitting corrosion  at low temperatures compared to  room temperature, but susceptibility of aluminum is about the same. This temperature effect refers only  to  initiation of pits  and not to rate  of pit  growth.  Size  of pits  after  a given time  depends  on the  cathodic reaction rate, the  latter in turn  usually proceeding  more  rapidly  the higher the  temperature.

E]]ect of anion concentration and  alloying.--It is known that  pitting of  A1 is  pronounced  in  presence of chloride ions. In sulfates, on the  other  hand,  A1  electrodes  can be polarized anodically without  exhibiting a critical pitting potential or  showing any evidence of pitting attack. In perchlorate solutions, however,  pitting  occurs, as  well  as  in  bromide and iodide solutions, although  the  pitting tendency  is  less pronounced  than in chloride solutions.

The respective steady-state critical potentials in each environment  are listed in  Table  I including the value  in 0.5M NaC1  reported  by Bond et  al. (2) and the  nonsteady-state values  reported  earlier by  Kaesche  (1).  The  more  active  the  critical potential, the greater is  the  tendency for  pitting to  occur. The effect of  temperature is  small in either 0.1M NaC1  or  NaBr.

Alloys  of A1  containing a small  amount of Mg  or Mn  tend  to  pit  more than  does pure  A1, although  the shift of potential is  small. For 99.4%  A1, the critical potential is  the  same as  for  99.99%  A1 within  experimental  error of  the  measurements. Porter  and Hadden (4) reported  that  immersion  tests  in various  supply waters  showed that  superpure A1 tended  to  pit  somewhat less  than did A1  alloys, although  the final pit depth  was almost  the same.

Added anions  which do not  of  themselves cause  pitting  shift the  critical potential of A1  in halide  solutions in  the  noble direction corresponding to  improved corrosion resistance. This  was shown previously to  be true  for  stainless steels (3,  5).  If  extraneous salts  are added in  amount sufficient to  shift the  critical potential above the oxygen electrode potential in air  ap-

Table  I.  Steady-state critical pitting  potentials, Ve, vs SHE

0.002

0.23

|                                            | Electrolyte                                                                                                                                                  | Electrolyte                                                                                                                                                  | Electrolyte                                                                                                                                                  | 25~                                                                    | 25~                      | O~             |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------|
| 99,99% A1 99.4% AI 1.3% Mn-A1 2.4% Mg-A1   | 0.11~ NaC1 0,1M NaBr O,IM NaCIO4 0,5M NaC1 [Bond el;aL (2)] 1M NaC1 [Kaesche (1)] 1M KBr [Kaesehe (1)] IM KI [Kaesehe (1)] 0.11Y/NaC1 0.11Y/ NaC1 0.1/YlNaC1 | 0.11~ NaC1 0,1M NaBr O,IM NaCIO4 0,5M NaC1 [Bond el;aL (2)] 1M NaC1 [Kaesche (1)] 1M KBr [Kaesehe (1)] IM KI [Kaesehe (1)] 0.11Y/NaC1 0.11Y/ NaC1 0.1/YlNaC1 | 0.11~ NaC1 0,1M NaBr O,IM NaCIO4 0,5M NaC1 [Bond el;aL (2)] 1M NaC1 [Kaesche (1)] 1M KBr [Kaesehe (1)] IM KI [Kaesehe (1)] 0.11Y/NaC1 0.11Y/ NaC1 0.1/YlNaC1 | --0,40V --0.29 0,0 --0.50 --0.48" --0.35* --0.20* --0.41 --0.45 --0.44 | --0.41V --0.32           |                |
| Metal analysis                             | Metal analysis                                                                                                                                               | Metal analysis                                                                                                                                               | Metal analysis                                                                                                                                               | Metal analysis                                                         | Metal analysis           | Metal analysis |
|                                            | %Cu                                                                                                                                                          | %Si                                                                                                                                                          | %Fe                                                                                                                                                          | %Mn                                                                    | %Mg                      | %Cr -- --      |
| 99,99% .$D. 99.4% AI 1.3% Mn-AI 2.4% Mg-A1 | 0.0039 0.1 0.006 0.04                                                                                                                                        | 0.0016 0.08 0.002 0.08                                                                                                                                       | 0.0007 0.48 0.002 0.16                                                                                                                                       | -- 0.004 1.3 0.02                                                      | 0.0005 0.0004 0.001 2.43 | 0.002          |

Fig. 2.  Relation  of  minimum activities (or  concentrations) of sodium nitrate or of sodium chromate required  to inhibit  pitting  of 99.99% AI  in aerated  sodium chloride  solutions.

<!-- image -->

proximating 0.8V,  it is  obvious  that  aluminum will  no longer  pit  in an aerated  solution of the  electrolyte mixture  since  the corrosion potential  cannot exceed the  open-circuit cathode  potential. Pitting could  then occur only under conditions where passivity breaks down locally, such as  in  a crevice due to  lack  of  oxygen and to  high  concentrations of  chloride ion  caused by  electrochemical transport, or to decrease  of pH caused by  accumulation  of AIC13.  Pitting otherwise would not  be expected  below the  critical potential in any period  of time for  a crevice-free passive  surface avoiding  environmental gradients of the kind mentioned

It  was  shown  earlier for stainless steels that  the logarithm of  the  activity of an extraneous anion  necessary  to shift  the potential to an  arbitrary noble value  accompanied  by inhibition of  pitting in  aerated solutions, is  linear with the logarithm  of the corresponding  chloride  ion activity. This relation is also found  to  hold  for  A1, as  is  shown  by  data  for  sodium nitrate and sodium chromate additions  (Fig.  2) and for  sodium sulfate, sodium  benzoate and sodium acetate  additions (Fig. 3),  where the  critical potential is shifted to 0.8V  (SHE)  in each case.  In calculating ionic  activities, the  corresponding activity coefficients were taken  from Latimer (6) for  pure sodium salts omitting corrections for total  ionic  strength  of the solutions. Since activity coefficients for sodium acetate  and sodium benzoate  were not  listed, they  were approximated  by corresponding  values for rubidium acetate at  and above  0.1M and by NaC1  below.  Values for  Na2CrO4  solutions were taken  from Robinson  and Stokes  (7)  above  0.1M and  approximated by values for Na2SO4  for  the one lower concentration.

Fig.  3.  Relation  of  minimum activities (or  concentrations) of sodium acetate  or  sodium benzoate or  sodium sulfate required  to inhibit  pitting of 99.99% AI  in aerated  sodium chloride solutions.

<!-- image -->

The  mixtures  of electrolytes were not adjusted  to constant pH in  view of  the  fact that  both  our  measurements  and  those previously reported by  Kaesche showed no appreciable effect of  pH  on the  critical potential. Molybdates and tungstates were also  tried as inhibiting anions,  but these  substances were probably reduced to insoluble oxides  at the aluminum  surface and hence led to irreproducible results. Equations representing inhibiting activities of the various  successful anions  are  as  follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Accordingly,  the efficiency of inhibition within the present  chloride concentration range decreases in the order: NO3-&gt; CrO4--  &gt; acetate  &gt; benzoate &gt; S04--.

Ellect of  heavy metal  ions.lit is  well  known  that traces  of  Cu + + greatly  accelerate the  pitting of A1 exposed  to  potable  or industrial waters. Water passing through  copper  or  brass piping, for  example,  picks  up sufficient Cu + + to damage  A1  surfaces  downstream. The  mechanism  of accelerated pitting is  apparently, first, the deposition of metallic Cu  on the A1  surface by a replacement  reaction, the sites of which act as pit  nuclei.  Second, the Cu  sites become  cathodes  for the  efficient reduction of  dissolved 02 or of  any other suitably reducible species in  solution, thereby  polarizing  A1  to  the  critical potential at  which anodic  corrosion or pitting takes  place.  The  potential reached is slightly more  noble than, but does not appreciably exceed the critical value,  however vigorous  the pit growth,  because of the small  anodic  polarizability of nonpassive  A1 within  the  pits  (cathodic control). The time  required for  the  shift from corrosion potential to critical potential is  about  30 sec  for  5  ppm  Cu  + + additions  to  0.1M  NaC1  as shown  by  data of Fig.  4.  For 5 ppm  Pd  + + addition, which behaves  similarly,  the time required  is  less, and  for  5 ppm  Fe  + + + addition  the time  is  longer, but  the same critical pitting potential is reached  in  each  case.

The above facts  suggest  that  a suitable approach  to measuring  critical potentials in  a given  saline solution is  to  determine  the  corrosion potential in presence  of a small  concentration of Cu +  +. The relevance of  this technique  to measuring critical potentials as a function  of  NaC1  concentration is  summarized in  Fig.  5.  As was  shown previously for  18-8 stainless  teel  (3),  the critical potentials for  A1  are  linear with  logarithm of C1-  activity. Comparative data obtained  by Kaesche using  a different  echnique are  included, showing good accord  with present  measurements.  Either  set  of  data follows  the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 4. Change of corrosion  potential with  time  on  immersion of 99.99% AI  in 0.1N  NaCI  plus  5 ppm Cu + +, 25~ Critical potentials  Vc  and  V'c are potentiostatic  values.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Corrosion potentials of 99.99% II in various  activities  of NaCI containing  5  ppm Cu +  + in  comparison with  critical  pitting potentials determined by  Kaesche.

<!-- image -->

Since  the critical potentials  calculated by this  equation, for reasons  stated earlier, are  slightly more noble than the  steady  state values, they  more  nearly  accord with the  continuous  polarization  values V'c (continuous shift of potential to more noble  values). For  example,  the  critical potential for  0.1M NaC1  (~ =  0.78) calculated by the  equation is  --0.37V  compared to  the steady-state value  --0.40V  given in Table I.

The success  of  the  above-described method for  measuring  critical potentials suggested  that  the effect of inhibiting anions could also be  investigated in like manner. In carrying out such measurements,  a higher concentration of Cu ++ (2.5 x  10-3M  or  159  ppm Cu + + ) was  found  to  be advisable in  order  to  stimulate growth of pits  that  are nucleated  at the  critical potential, therefore making it  easier to  count  their number.  Figure  6, for  example,  shows that  Na2SO4  additions  to 0.005M  NaC1  shift  the resultant critical potentials for  A1, as determined  potentiostatically, in  the noble direction. The  equilibrium potential for  Cu Cu + +  + 2e,  on the  other  hand,  corresponding to  2.5  x 10-~M  CuSO4  is  equal  to  0.337 -t-  (0.059/2) log (2.5  x 10  -3 x  0.7) = 0.256V where 0.7 is  the approximate activity coefficient of the  CuSO4  solution (6).  The calculated potential is  relatively insensitive to  the  actual value  chosen for  the  activity coefficient. Hence if  the electrolyte is  deaerated  with nitrogen, Cu + + reduction  is  the  only  relevant cathodic  reaction and pitting is therefore expected only below  a  SO4--  activity of  0.02  corresponding to  0.035M  Na2SO4. To check  this prediction, specimens of  99.4% A1 (same  approx. critical potential as  pure  A1) were  immersed  in  0.005M NaC1  containing various  additions of Na2SO4  plus  2.5 x  10-~M  CuSO4,  the results of which are shown  in Fig.  7.  Many  of the pits, when  observed  after  an immersion  period  of  24 hr,  were localized on the speci-

|

-

-

Fig. 6. Critical pitting potentials, determined potentlostatically, of AI  in 0.005M NaCI  with  Na2SO4 additions, and in 0.1M NaCI with NaNO3 additions, 25~

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7.  Number  of pits  per specimen  after  immersing  99.4%  AI in 0.005M NaCI with  Na2SO4  additions,  and in 0.1M NaCI with NaNO3  additions, 24  hr,  25~

<!-- image -->

men  edges, but for convenience  only those were counted  on the  two main faces. When  pitting was not observed  on either face  or edges,  the  test was usually continued  beyond 24 hr to the order of two  weeks so as  to confirm  that  no pitting had taken  place.

As  the results show, the intersection of the line connecting points for  the  Na2SO4  concentrations which induce  pitting, with  the  line for  zero  pitting occurs  at an  activity of  S O 4 - -   equal  to  0.02.  This  value  agrees with the  inhibiting activity predicted by  data  of  Fig. 6. Similar  good  agreement  was  found between predicted and  observed inhibiting concentrations of NaNO8 added to  0.1M NaCI  (Fig. 6 and 7).

(3,  5).  A l u m i n u m   provides  an excellent opportunity to evaluate the  influence of an oxide  film  because  of the well-established procedure  for increasing oxide film thickness by anodizing. The thicker the  oxide  film, presumably  the smaller is  the  electric field impelling C1- to  penetrate it  and  the  longer is  the  diffusion path of  C1-  from  electrolyte to  metal surface.  These factors, if relevant, should combine  to produce a more  noble critical pitting potential. On  the  other hand,  if  competitive adsorption at  the  metal  surface is the  mechanism,  the  thickness of any overlying oxide film  would have no bearing  on the steady-state potential at  which C1- displaces adsorbed  oxygen.

Aluminum  specimens  of 99.99%  purity  were  anodized  in  15%  H2SO4 at  25 mA/cm 2 for  specific times, then washed  and sealed  in distilled water at 9O~ for V2  hr,  Thickness  of oxide  produced  by anodizing was estimated from values reported by Hoar  and  Wood (10).  Steady-state critical potentials were determined by potentiostatic polarization in  0.1M  NaC1.  Although continuous polarization runs showed  a slightly more noble value (--0.33V)  for anodized electrodes, the same steady-state value  --0.39V  was obtained both for an oxide  film  0.3  and 1.4~  thick, compared to  --0.40V for  aluminum not  anodized. The latter values  are  the same within the  usual  experimental variations of  such measurements.  They support  the  view,  therefore, that the  mechanism of competitive adsorption is  in  better accord  with  the  facts, and they  also  provide  evidence that  any  improved  resistance of  anodized  aluminum  to pitting corrosion does not result from a shift of the critical potential.

The  amount  of extraneous  salt  needed to inhibit pitting depends on the  applied potential as data of Fig.  6 show.  Hence the  amount of  sulfate which is  required  to inhibit pitting in  presence of Cu + + at a cathode  potential of  0.26V is  less than  that  required in presence  of dissolved air  at  0.8V.  The latter  situation is  described by Fig. 3.

Effect of  cations.--Since anions  have a large  effect on  the  critical potential, it  is of interest to know whether  the  type  and valence  of  cations also  have an influence. The effect of calcium  ion  was  investigated by measuring  through continuous  potentiostatic polarization curves  the critical potentials of 99.99% A1 in 5 concentrations of CaC12 from 0.05 to 1.0M. The dependence  of the critical potential V'c on logarithm of  chloride ion activity followed the same linear equation  within  expected  experimental variations as that derived for  NaC1  (Eq.  [6]). Hence it  is  concluded  that a divalent cation  like Ca  + + has no special effect on the critical potential compared to a monovalent  ion like  Na +.  Subsequent  measurements  were carried out in O.IN  KCl,  RbCl, CsC1,  SrC12,  BaC12,  and  LaC13. Observed steady-state critical potentials corrected to the same  approximate  C1-  activity, using  the equation  cited  above,  were all the same within  less  than 20  mV,  hence only the C1-  activity appears  to be important. However, continuous polarization runs (50 mV/5  min)  gave nonsteady-state critical potentials for  BaC12  and CsC1  which were about 70 mV more noble  than for  the other  chlorides listed above.  Although  this peculiar effect of  Ba  + + and Cs  + was not investigated further, it is  perhaps  caused  by the  double layer  reaching its  equilibrium structure much  slower when  large  cations like  Ba  + + and Cs  +  are  involved compared to  the  situation for  smaller  cations.

## Discussion

The critical potential has been explained in terms of C1-  penetrating an oxide film  which covers  the metal  surface (8,  9) or  in  terms  of  competitive adsorption  of  C1- and oxygen for  sites on  the metal  surface

Davies (11)  reported improved  resistance to  pitting corrosion of anodized  aluminum immersed in  a solution  containing 30 ppm  CI-,  40 ppm  Ca  ++, and 0.2 ppm  Cu +  +.  No pits appeared  in  two weeks time,  contrary to  unanodized specimens  which pitted in  a much shorter period. These results suggest that  the  anodized oxide film  is  a good diffusion barrier to Cu ++  ions even though it is  not  successful in preventing diffusion of C1-  ions.  This matter  was  checked  by  anodizing 99.99% A1 specimens  to a film  thickness of 1.4~  and sealing in  H20  at  90~ for  1 hr.  They were then  immersed in O.IM  NaC1  containing 2.5  x  10-SM  Cu ++ at 25~ Two specimens were  coupled to an  equal area  of  copper;  these  showed evidence of  pitting after 2 hr,  with many  deep pits  visible after  24 hr.  Two specimens  not coupled  were free  of pits  after 24 hr, in  line with  Davies' longer  time  observations.

The above results show  therefore that  Cu + + must penetrate the oxide film  in order  to deposit  suitable cathodic sites of  metallic Cu before  pitting is  observed in  short-time tests. To this  end,  anodized  A1 is  better than unanodized  A1. They  also show  that  anodized films  have no particular merit  in preventing pitting corrosion whenever aluminum is  coupled  to a more cathodic metal  like Cu.

The high-temperature coefficient of  the  critical potential for austenitic stainless steels reported  previously  (3,  12) was attributed to  sensitivity of  the  double layer  structure to temperature, caused perhaps by variable hydration of  the  passive film  and of  ions  located  within  the  double  layer. A  negligible temperature  effect for  A1  suggests that  it  is  not  the temperature-sensitive hydration of ions  that  is  important so much as  the temperature-sensitive hydration  and structure of the  passive film  in  the case  of 18-8,  and the  absence of  such  an  effect for  the  passive film on A1.

The role  played  by various cations is  not  important, probably  because  characteristically they do not  adsorb at  prevailing potentials, and hence their effect on the double  layer  and on passive film  structure is  minimal. The behavior  of extraneous  anions  to inhibit pitting is  similar to the behavior  noted  previously for 18-8 stainless steel  for  which inhibiting efficiency, as for A1,  decreases in  the  order NO3-  &gt;  Ac- &gt;  SO4--.  The data  for  inhibition of 18-8  by NO8-  and SO4-- were previously reported by Leckie  and Uhlig (3) ;  for  acetates the  data  were presently obtained using the same

|         | Observed ratios   | Observed ratios   |            |                | Calc. ratios   |               |
|---------|-------------------|-------------------|------------|----------------|----------------|---------------|
|         | I~c1-/nNo3 -      | ~tc1-/1~so 4 -    | RC 1-/nAt- | RSO 4 --/RN08- | RAe-/I~N03-    | nSO 4 --/RA-c |
| 18-8 A1 | 1.88 0.65         | 0.85 0.31         | 1.12 0.41  | 2.21 2.10      | 1.68 1.59      | 1.32 1.32     |

potentiostatic technique  and the same  stainless  teel as was used formerly.  The equation  representing activity of acetate  necessary  to inhibit pitting of 18-8 in  a given  activity of C1- ranging  from 0.05 to 0.2M NaC1 is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above log-log  relationship was  derived  by Matsuda and Uhlig (13) on the basis  of the Freundlich adsorption isotherm; al =  kl (Anion)~znl where (Anion)  is  the  anion  activity in  solution, al  is  the  quantity of  anion  adsorbed  per  unit area, and kl  and nl  are constants. It  was shown that  the  coefficient of  the  log (Ac-) term in the above Eq.  [7] is then equal to ncl-/nAc-. The  values  of this  ratio  are in  general larger for  18-8  than  for  A1, corresponding to  a greater tendency  for  C1to  adsorb  on A1 than  on 18-8.  Interestingly, the  ratio of n's  for  any pair  of ions  not  involving  C1-  are similar for  both A1  and  18-8.  This is shown  by  the derived  values  listed in Table II. For  example, nso4--/nNo3obtained by  dividing ncl-/nNo 3by ncl-/nso4-is  2.21  for  18-8  and 2.10 for  A1. The similarity of  these  ratios for  anions  other than  C1- point  to the  unique  adsorption behavior  of C1-  which is  also  the anion  among those  presently considered  which is  responsible for observed  pitting corrosion.

## Acknowledgment

The authors  are  pleased  to  acknowledge  support  of this  research  by  the Office  of  Saline  Water, U.S.

Department  of  the  Interior. One of  the  author's (H.B.) is  furthermore grateful for  a travel grant  awarded by Stiftungen auf  dem  Gebiete  der  Chemic, Basle,  Switzerland.

Manuscript  submitted  Oct. 17, 1968; revised  manuscript received ca. Jan.  28,  1969. This was Paper 388 presented at  the  Montreal Meeting,  Oct.  6-11,  1968.

Any  discussion of this  paper  will  appear  in  a Discussion  Section to be  published  in the June  1970 JOURNAL.

## REFERENCES

1.  H.  Kaesche, Z.  physik. Chem. N.F., 34, 87  (1962).
3.  H. Leckie  and  H. Uhlig, ibid., 113,  1262  (1966).
2.  A. Bond, G. Bolling, and H. Domian, This  Journal, 113, 773  (1966).
4.  F.  Porter and S.  Hadden, J.  Appl.  Chem.  (London), 3, 385 (1953).
6.  W. Latimer,  "Oxidation  Potentials,"  Prentice-Hall, New York (1952).
5.  Y.  Kolotyrkin, Corrosion, 19, 261t  (1963).
7.  R.  Robinson and R.  Stokes, "Electrolyte Solutions," p.  486, Academic Press, New York (1955).
9.  T.  Hoar, D.  Mears, and G.  Rothwell, Corrosion Sci., 5, 279 (1965).
8.  M. Streicher, This Journal, 103, 375 (1956).
10.  T.  Hoar  and  G. Wood, Electrochim.  Acta, 7, 333 (1962).
12.  J.  Horvath  and H. Uhlig, This  Journal, U5, 791 (1968).
12. Ii. D.  Davies, J. Appl. Chem. (London), 9, 651 (1959).
13.  S.  Matsuda and H.  Uhlig, ibid., 111, 156 (1964).

## Electrochemical Ellipsometric  Study of  Gold

## R. S. Sirohi  and  M.  A. Genshaw

Electrochemistry Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

## ABSTRACT

The  application of ellipsometry and  electrochemical techniques  to the oxidation of  gold  reveals that  a chemisorbed  species is  formed in  the  potential region  0.2-l.iV vs. SCE in acidic  solution with gold oxide formed at more anodic  potentials. In alkaline solution  the chemisorbed  species  formed in  the  potential region  --0.8  to -}-0.2V vs. SCE  with  oxide  formation at  more anodic potentials. Evidence supporting a  change in the optical  properties of the oxide film  with pH  and,  for  alkaline solution, with the presence  of chloride ions, is presented.

The  electrochemical oxidation of gold has been a topic of  interest for  many years  (1-11). This  oxidation leads to  the  formation of  chemisorbed  oxygen (1,  5,  7) or  gold  oxide (1-6, 8-10)  with  the  initial formation of this film  occurring about  1.27-1.37V  (1,  3,  4, 7-10) vs. a reversible hydrogen  electrode (RHE). Reduction  of the film commences  at potentials between 1.2 and 1.37V  (4, 6-8,  9,  10) vs. RHE. The potential of  oxidation and reduction varies by --2.3 RT/F (3-5, 8,  9) per  unit pH.  The  thickness of the film  is of the order of a monolayer,  but  at  potentials more anodic  than 1.8 (7, 10) --1.95V  (8), a thick  oxide  film  forms.

Inflections in  charging curves,  which  could not be reproduced  by  later workers (5-10), were attributed to  successive formation of  Au20, AuO,  and AutO3  (4). Two  arrests  in film  reduction have  been  attributed to Au203  and AuOH or  AuO (2,  12).

In acidic chloride solutions passivation is  observed, with the passivation time dependent  on the concentration of  chloride (13-17), indicating that  passivation occurs  when the  surface concentration of chloride approaches  zero.

An  ellipsometric study  of  gold  oxidation in  sulfuric acid  solutions, some with  added oxalate, has been reported (18).

To gain  further insight into  the  nature  of the  film formed  at  gold  on  electrochemical oxidation, this study, which combines  optical and electrochemical measurements,  was  initiated.

Ellipsometry is  the  measurement of changes introduced in  the polarization state  of light by reflection from metal  or  metal  oxide  surface. The reflected light is  analyzed  for  its  polarization state, giving  the relative  phase retardation h  and relative amplitude  di-