Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 1993, Volume 140, Issue 8, Pages 2192-2197.

ISSN: 0013-4651

DOI:  10.1149/1.2220794

http://www.electrochem.org/

http://www.ecsdl.org/getpdf/servlet/GetPDFServlet?filetype=pdf&amp;id=JESOAN000140000008002192000001&amp;idtyp e=cvips&amp;prog=normal

© The Electrochemical Society, Inc.1993. All rights reserved. Except as provided under U.S. copyright law, this work may not be reproduced, resold, distributed, or modified without the express permission of The Electrochemical Society (ECS). The archival version of this work was published in Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 1993, Volume 140, Issue 8, Pages 2192-2197.

## On the Pitting Resistance of Sputter-Deposited Aluminum Alloys

## G. S. Frankel * R. C, Newman, a C. V. Jahnes, and M. A. Russak

IBM Research Division, T. J. Watson Research Center Yorktown Heights, New York a UMIST, Corrosion and Protection Centre, Manchester, England

## Abstract

The pitting behavior of sputter-deposited Al binary alloy thin films was studied. Pitting and repassivation potentials  were determined in 0.1 M NaCl  for  samples  in  freshly  deposited  and  air-aged  states.  Aging  for  several years in laboratory air increased the pitting potential for some of the alloy systems but had no effect on others. The repassivation potentials, meaningful values for pits in thin films, were found to be very close to the pitting potentials of  freshly-deposited  films  for  many  alloy  systems.  Stable  pits  initiate  in  these  Al  binary  alloys  at  potentials  just above  the  value  at  which  they  would  repassivate,  indicating  that  pit  growth  considerations  control  the  pitting process.  By  determining  the  pit  anodic  current  density  just  before  passivation  it  is  shown  that  alloying  improves pitting resistance through a reduction in the ability of pits to maintain the  critical local environment necessary for growth. The influences of alloying on the passive film chemistry and on the tendency of the metal to repassivate (depassivation pH) are secondary in nature.

Sputter-deposited supersaturated Al binary alloys have been shown to exhibit remarkable pitting  resistance  in  chloride  solutions. 1-6 The  pitting  potential,  measured  in  01 M Cl -,  for  Al alloyed with about 5 atom percent (a/o) of any of a number of elements is about 600 mV higher than that for pure Al. Alloys with Mo, Nb, and Ta have pitting potentials that increase steadily with solute content at least to 40 a/o. AlW alloys have been reported to exhibit even better pitting resistance  for  a  given  composition. 6,7 Interestingly,  the  pitting  potential  for  AlCr  alloys  is independent of concentration and comparatively low for alloys in the range of 5-35 a/o Cr. 3

Moshier and coworkers have studied the evolution of the passive film  chemistry for a number  of  sputtered  Al  alloys. 2,4,5 They  have  attributed  the  improved  pitting  resistance  to enrichment of the solute element in the passive film. Specifically, passive films on AlTa, AlMo, and AlCr alloys were found to be enriched with Ta2O5,  MoO4 -2 ,  and  CrOOH, respectively. It was suggested that these species impede the ingress of chloride through the passive film. Surface analysis of films formed near the pitting potential suggested to them that pitting occurred either as a result of changes in the passive film (oxidation of Cr +3 to  Cr +6 or  replacement of MoO4 -2 with Mo +4 )  or  by  field-assisted  penetration  of  chloride  (in  the  case  of  AlTa,  which  has  a  thin passive film).  In contrast to these systems, W has been found to be depleted from the passive film  on  AlW  alloys. 6,7 This  occurs  despite  the  observation  that  alloying  with  W  is  extremely effective in improving pitting resistance.

Others have proposed that the enrichment of solute ions in the passive film on these Al alloys decreases the pH of zero charge, which in turn acts to repel chloride ion from the electrode surface. 8 Recently, the work on AlW alloys has prompted Smialowska to suggest that the solute elements exert their influences at the active pit surface rather than in the passive film. 3 She has proposed that the limited solubility of the oxidized solute phase in the acidic pit environment is responsible for the improved resistance to pitting.

This paper presents data to support the idea put forth by Frankel and Newman that the alloying  of  Al  by  sputter-deposition  might  alter  the  kinetics  of  the  dissolution  process. 10 A similar  argument  has  been  proposed  for  the  role  of  Mo  in  stainless  steels. 11,12 By  analysis  of repassivation and pitting potentials, along with the pit current densities, it will be shown that the role  of  solute  enrichment  in  the  passive  film  on  sputtered  Al  alloys  is  small  in  comparison  to changes in the ability of a pit to sustain the conditions necessary for growth.

The  notion  of  repassivation  or  protection  potential  has  been  in  the  literature  for  thirty years. 13 However,  the  utility  of  the  repassivation  potential  has  been  questioned  because  of evidence showing that it depends strongly on experimental parameters such as the potential scan rate and the charge passed between pit initiation and the point of reversal scanning direction. 14,15 Studies of pits in thin metallic films on inert substrates have shown that, in contrast to pits in bulk samples, the repassivation potential is a reproducible and meaningful value because there is no increasing dimension to result in an increasing diffusion path or ohmic potential drop. 16,17 Pits in  thin  films  grow  in  a  2-D  fashion  with  a  constant  current  density  and  repassivate  at  the potential  at  which  the  current  density  is  so  low  that  the  critical  pit  environment  cannot  be maintained. The repassivation potential for pits in NiFe thin films has been found to be slightly dependent  on  thickness,  and  just  above  the  intersection  with  the  potential  axis  of  a  linear extrapolation of the pit current density vs. potential curve. 17

An analysis of pit growth in thin film samples has shown that ohmic and charge-transfer considerations may be important below the limiting current density and that the position of the current density vs. potential curve along the potential axis is controlled by both thermodynamics, through  the  reversible  potential  of  the  alloy  in  the  pit  environment,  and  kinetics,  through  the exchange current density. 17 The position of this curve and the repassivation potential therefore provide a measure of the influence of the rate of dissolution in the pit on the pitting potential.

It should be noted that growth and repassivation of stable pits are described in this paper. However the relevance of these data to the phenomenon of metastable pitting will be discussed.

## Experimental

Thin-film sputter-deposited samples, with thickness in the range of 1000-2000 Ǻ, were tested in stagnant, air-exposed 0.1 M NaCl. Samples were examined with no pre-treatment of the surface, other than washing with water. The samples were masked with a sputter-deposited oxide film as described previously 18 and pressed against the bottom of a Plexiglas cell, facing upwards, using a Viton o-ring. An SCE reference electrode was used and all potentials are referred to this scale.

The potential was scanned at a rate of 1 mV/s anodically from open circuit until a stable pit formed, as evidenced by an abrupt and prolonged increase in current. At that point, which is defined  as  the  pitting  potential,  the  scan  was  halted  and  the  potential  was  held  constant  for  a period. Images of the growing pit were recorded using a system described previously 16 and the potential was then stepped downward (in the active direction) in increments of 10-100 mV to potentials which were maintained for periods of 15-120 s before further downward stepping. At relatively high potentials close to the pitting potential where the pit growth rate was high, the potential was held for only short periods (≈15-20 s) before stepping the potential down further, and large potential steps were applied. At potentials near the repassivation potential, where the rate of pit growth was lower, each potential was applied for longer periods and the steps were 10 mV in  size.  In  this  fashion  it  was  possible  to  determine  accurate  values  of  the  repassivation potential, E R, which is defined as the point at which the pit was observed to stop growing. Given the  resolution  of  the  optical  system,  the  fact  that  the  pit  image  was  unchanging  for  120  s indicates  that  the  pit  current  density  after  repassivation  was  less  than  about  0.25  A/cm 2 .  A sudden drop in dissolution rate of over 20 times following a decrease in potential of only 10 mV was  quite  obvious  and  clear  evidence  of  repassivation.  This  approach  to  measuring E R  is  not possible for pits in bulk samples for which the active pit surface is not entirely visible. Optical determination of E R for pits in thin films is much more accurate than the commonly used method of ascertaining the interception of the reverse scan with the forward scan. The passive current density  for  these  Al  alloys  may  vary  considerably  with  potential  and  is  a  function  of  prior polarization history.  As  a result, the intersection of the forward and reverse scans may not be related to cessation of pitting. Furthermore, pits in thin films grow rapidly and can quickly reach the sample edge and then continue with different controlling considerations as crevice corrosion under the masking material. By constantly examining the pit, it is possible to be sure that such complications are prevented.

Many of the samples were deposited 2-4 years earlier and kept during that time at room temperature  in  plastic  boxes,  but  otherwise  unprotected  from  the  laboratory  atmosphere.  The pitting potentials of these aged samples were compared to values measured on the same samples (or  sister  samples  deposited  in  the  same  run)  in  the  freshly  deposited  condition  several  years earlier. 3 New samples of some compositions were deposited to check the pitting potentials of freshly deposited alloys reported previously. Most of the repassivation potential measurements were  made  on  aged  samples  as  it  was  assumed  that E r would  not  change  with  aging.  This assumption  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the  repassivation  potentials  for  aged  and  freshly deposited samples of the same composition were identical. Furthermore, aging will only affect the very top fraction of the samples, whereas repassivation involves cessation of dissolution of a cross section of the whole alloy thin film, which is unchanged by room-temperature aging. It is not expected that aging of these alloys at room temperature results in microstructural changes such as  precipitate  formation,  which  is  commonly  associated  with  commercial  Al  alloys.  The formation of precipitates would increase the corrosion and pitting susceptibility. The microstructures of these supersaturated alloys remain stable during prolonged storage  at room temperature and, as will be shown, exhibit improved resistance to pitting. For the purpose of this work, "freshly deposited" samples were tested within a few months of deposition, while "aged" samples were tested more than a year after deposition. It should be noted that the earlier study used 0.1 M NaCl adjusted to a pH of 10 with NaOH and a slower scan rate of 0.2 mV/s.

The anodic current density at the pit surface was determined for some of the pits at each potential  step  during  the  approach  to E R  by  analysis  of  the  images  of  the  growing  pit  using  a method described previously. 16,17 In most experiments, more than one pit formed. As a result, the net  current  density  and  the  rate  of  the  hydrogen  evolution  were  not  determined.  However, copious hydrogen gas evolution was observed during many of the experiments. Weighted values of n , ρ, and M were used in the analysis where these constants have their usual meanings.

Fig.  1.  Pitting  potentials  for  freshly  deposited  samples, E p,  and  aged  samples E p a , along  with  repassivation potentials, E R , for pure Al and AlNb alloys.

<!-- image -->

## Results

Pitting  potentials  measured  on  aged  samples  and  repassivation  potentials  provided considerable  insight  into  the  role  of  the  solute  additions  in  increasing  pitting  resistance.  Each alloy system behaved somewhat differently and is discussed in turn. Data for the AlNb system are given in Fig. 1. The pitting potentials for AlNb films increased by about 300 mV during a storage period of 4 years. As was true for most alloy systems, the scatter in the pitting potentials for  aged  samples  was  quite  large.  The  pitting  potentials  for  the  freshly  deposited  samples determined in the earlier study 3 also exhibited considerable scatter and the values reported were averages  of  several  experiments.  For  aged  AlNb  samples,  however,  the  pitting  potential  was typically  much  higher  than  that  found  for  corresponding  samples  in  the  freshly  deposited condition. The repassivation potentials were only about 100 mV lower than the pitting potentials measured on freshly  deposited  samples.  In  contrast  to  the  pitting  potentials,  the  repassivation potentials were reproducible to within ±10 mV. This very small scatter in E R has been observed for all thin film systems studied to date and is in contrast to the behavior of pits in bulk samples. As mentioned, E R was found previously to vary with NiFe metal film thickness over the range 300 Ǻ-1 µm. 17 The samples in this study, however, all had a thickness within the range 10002000 Ǻ, so the influence of thickness variations was minimal.

The behavior of pure Al films is also shown in Fig. 1. Freshly sputter deposited Al films exhibit a pitting potential of -690 mV SCE, which is close to the value observed for pits in bulk pure Al in 0.1 M NaCl. The pitting potential for Al films aged 4 years was about 200 mV higher, a factor that is well beyond the range of scatter for freshly deposited samples. The value of E R for  pure  Al  films  was  found  to  be  only  about  25  mV  below  the  pitting  potential  for  freshly deposited films.

Figure 2 shows data for the AlMo system. Some new AlMo samples were examined and found to have similar pitting potentials to the freshly deposited samples examined in the previous study  despite  the  differences  in  solution  pH  and  scanning  rate.  Unlike  the  AlNb  system,  the pitting potentials of aged AlMo samples were not higher than those of freshly deposited samples. Except for one concentration, the values of E R were only about 50 mV

Fig.  2.  Pitting  potentials  for  freshly  deposited  samples, E p ,  and  aged  samples, E p a , ,  along  with  repassivation potentials, E R, for pure Al and AlMo alloys.

<!-- image -->

lower than the pitting potentials. E R for the 10% Mo alloy was anomalously low. This value was measured on an aged sample, and the pitting potential was also  low.  The  older  samples  were deposited from two targets (Al and the solute element) and the compositions were determined by averaging the  compositions, measured by Rutherford backscattering, of films on small carbon substrates placed to either side of each sample during deposition. This method was general quite reliable. However, given the small scatter in the measurement of E R , the anomalous behavior for this sample is likely due to an error in the measurement of concentration.

Aged  AlW  samples  were  not  tested  because  the  original  study  did  not  include  this system. However, freshly deposited AlW samples with up to 5.2% W were examined and the data  are  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Comparison  with  Fig.  2  reveals  that  the  pitting  potentials  of  AlW samples  were  similar  to  those  of  AlMo  samples  with  similar  compositions.  For  instance,  the pitting potential of Al-5.2% W was about -60 mV SCE. This is in contrast to reports by Shaw et al. who have indicated that this alloy should not pit until above 800 mV SCE. 7 Similar to the behavior of the AlMo system, the repassivation potentials for pits in AlW were only about 50 mV below the pitting potentials.

The AlCr alloys exhibited yet a different behavior, Fig. 4. Pitting potentials for aged AlCr samples  were  particularly  nonreproducible;  some  aged  samples  improved  tremendously  while others actually had lower pitting potentials than freshly deposited samples. Included in Fig. 4 are two alloys that were recently deposited and tested in the fresh state. Like the new AlMo samples, the pitting potentials measured for these samples were in the range of values found previously. The repassivation potentials decreased by 180 mV with increasing Cr content over the range of 6-30%  Cr.  As  will  be  described  below,  this  behavior  may  result  from  the  effects  of  Cr hydrolysis.  The  values  of E R are  up  to  300  mV  lower  than  the  pitting  potentials  of  freshly deposited samples.

Fig.  3.  Pitting  potentials  for  freshly  deposited  samples, E p ,  and  aged  samples, E p a , along  with  repassivation potentials, E R, for pure Al, AlV alloys, AlMn alloys, and AlW alloys.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  4.  Pitting  potentials  for  freshly  deposited  samples, E p ,  and  aged  samples, E p a , , along with repassivation potentials, E R, for pure Al and AlCr alloys.

<!-- image -->

Other  systems  have  been  studied  to  a  limited  extent.  The  behavior  of  AlV  and  AlMn alloys is shown in Fig. 3. These alloys were not tested in the fresh state and were aged only about 2 years. However, the pitting potentials of these aged samples indicate that alloying with either Mn or  V  is  also  beneficial.  Other  investigators  have  also  seen  beneficial  effects  of  Mn, 19 an element not typically considered to improve corrosion resistance. The repassivation potentials of AlMn and AlV alloys are similar and are not strong functions of solute concentration. However, AlMn  alloys  pitted  at  potentials  just  above  their  repassivation  potentials  whereas  AlV  alloys pitted at much higher potentials.

## Discussion

By studying the behavior of sputter-deposited Al alloy thin films, it is possible both to fabricate extremely corrosion-resistant materials that are not possible by conventional approaches,  and  to  utilize  analytical  techniques  that  allow  accurate  determination  of  the  pit current  densities  and  repassivation  potentials.  Since  the  pit  depth  (equal  to  the  metal  film thickness) is unchanging during pit growth and quite small, pits in thin films behave throughout their life like very small pits in bulk samples.

The behavior of the AlNb system shown in Fig. 1 provides a useful framework for the interpretation  of  the  repassivation  potentials  and  the  aged-sample  behavior.  The  improvement achieved  by  alloying,  over  the  behavior  of  pure  Al,  can  be  divided  into  two  components:  the influence of the passive film and the role of pit growth. The value of E R is not dependent on the extent  of  prior  growth  for  pits  in  thin  films.  For  pits  growing  in  a  stable  fashion  at  higher potentials,  it  is  an  accurate  limiting  value  at  which  they  will  cease  to  grow  if  the  potential  is stepped downward. Since stable pit growth is not possible below E R , the portion of the increase in  pitting  potential  from  that  of  pure  Al  to E R  for  a  given  alloy  results  from  pit  growth considerations (see Fig. 1). Extremely noble potentials are required for a pit to grow in the Al alloy films. Pits can grow in a stable fashion above E R  but  stable  pits  do  not  initiate  until  the pitting potential because  of  protection  provided  by  the  passive  film. According  to  this interpretation, the difference between the alloy repassivation and pitting potentials is the added effect of protection provided by the alloy passive film, as schematically indicated in Fig. 1. Since very  little  scatter  exists  in  the E R  data,  it  is  the  passive  film  component  that  results  in  the experimental scatter in pitting potentials. Clearly, enrichment of a solute element such as Nb in the  alloy  passive  film  is  beneficial.  However,  the  magnitude  of  this  benefit  is  small  in comparison to the large effect of the inhibition of pit growth.

Since  aging  does  not  alter  the E R values,  it  results  in  added  benefit  by  improving  the passive film, as shown in Fig. 1. For the AlNb system, the aging effect is quite large, although the major portion of the improvement over the behavior of Al is still from pit growth limitations. Davis et.  al 5 have shown that Ta preferentially segregates to the passive film formed on AlTa alloys,  and  it  is  likely  that  Nb  in  AlNb  acts  similarly.  It  may  be  speculated  that  continued preferential  oxidation  of  Nb  during  prolonged  air  exposure  is  responsible  for  the  influence  of aging, but aging was not the focus of this study and detailed analyses of the passive films were not  performed.  However,  since  pure  Al  also  improved  with  time,  aging  may  involve  oxide thickening and reordering as well as solute enrichment.

AlMo alloys were previously found to exhibit a higher pitting potential  than AlNb for given solute atomic concentration. 3 Since  the  pitting  potentials  for  fresh  and  aged  samples  are only slightly above the repassivation potentials, the increase in pitting resistance is dominated by the effects of pit growth. The passive films formed on AlMo alloys, which have been shown to be enriched with Mo, 2,4 generate much less protection than the films formed on AlNb alloys, and aging  of  the  AlMo  films  does  not  add  improvement.  So  despite  the  enrichment  of  Mo  in  the passive  film,  stable  pits  initiate  at  potentials  only  slightly  above  the  potential  at  which  they repassivate.

The  large  influence  of  pit  growth  can  be  understood  through  the  conditions  for  pit repassivation, i.e. , the pit stability criteria. For a pit to continue to grow, the environment at the active pit surface must be more aggressive than a critical condition for repassivation. This critical condition may be viewed as a critical surface pH for a given dissolving metal. The ability of a material to passivate will determine this critical pH. A material that repassivates more readily, perhaps as a result of a lower solubility as has been suggested by Smialowska, 9 would have a lower repassivation pH. This means it would have a larger range of passivity than a material that was weakly passivating. Since the pH of the pit electrolyte is controlled by cation hydrolysis, the critical  pH  is  associated  with  a  critical  surface  cation  concentration  in  the  pit  electrolyte.  The cation  concentration  is  in  turn  related  to  the  pit  current  density  and  the  pit  geometric  and hydrodynamic conditions. The more readily repassivating material with lower critical pH would have a higher critical  surface  cation  concentration  and  higher  critical  current  density.  In  other words,  it  would  take  more  current  density  to  maintain  the  more  aggressive  critical  pit environment needed for this strongly passivating material to continue growing.

The  scenario  presented  above  suggests  that  two  factors  control  the  repassivation potential. The first is the tendency of the metal to repassivate, which is described by the critical environment, pH, cation concentration, or current density for repassivation. The second factor is the ability of the metal to maintain at least that critical environment at the controlled potentials. Part  of  this  effect  is  the  kinetics  of  dissolution  as  determined  by  the  reversible  potential, exchange  current  density,  activation  overpotential,  ohmic  potential  drop  and  concentration overpotential.  Another  part  is  the  hydrolysis  of  the  dissolved  cations  or  the  relation  between cation concentration and pH.

For bulk samples, as discussed above, larger pits exhibit a lower repassivation potential than smaller pits. 14, 15 This happens because the critical pH can be maintained with lower current density since transport is more difficult as a pit deepens. According to Galvele's detailed

Fig. 5. Anodic pit current density as a function of growth potential for pure Al and AlNb alloys. The points on the abscissa represent the repassivation potentials. The arrows indicate the critical pit current densities for repassivation.

<!-- image -->

description  of  this  phenomenon,  a  critical  value  of x  ·  i is  required  to  achieve  sufficient  pit acidification for pit growth to continue, where x is pit depth and i is current density. 20 Pits in thin films  grow  laterally  with  constant  pit  depth  once  reaching  the  substrate  so  the  critical x  ·  i condition reduces to that of a critical i for continued pit growth. The repassivation potential and current  density  at  the  point  of  repassivation  for  pits  in  thin  films  have  been  found  to  increase slightly  for  thinner  films. 17 However, for  pits  in  thin  films  with  similar  geometry,  the  current density at the point of repassivation should be a measure of the critical surface concentration.

The pit current density for pits in AlNb films is shown in Fig. 5 as a function of potential during  the  downward  stepping  of  potential.  Also  included  in  Fig.  5  are  anodic  pit  current densities  as  a  function  of  potential  determined  previously  for  pure  Al. 16 These  curves  were obtained  by  stepping  the  potential  downwards  from  the  pitting  potential,  which  is  the  highest potential on each curve. The lowest potential for each curve is the last value at which pit growth was observed, or ≈ 10 mV above E R. The current density at this potential (marked by an arrow in Fig. 5) is the critical pit current density, or the current density below which pits repassivate. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the critical current densities do not increase as the Nb content and pitting

Fig. 6. Anodic pit current density as a function of growth potential for pure Al and AlCr alloys.

<!-- image -->

potential increase.  In fact, they may decrease slightly. Similar behavior was exhibited by pits in AlCr films, Fig. 6. As described above, a material that repassivates more easily should have a higher critical pit current density. The fact that the pit current density prior to repassivation does not  increase  with  Nb  or  Cr  concentration  suggests  that  the  great  improvement  achieved  by alloying  Al  with  Nb  or  Cr  does  not  result  from  an  improvement  in  the  ability  of  pits  to repassivate. Instead, it arises from a decrease in the ability of the dissolving metal to maintain the critical pit environment. The repassivation potential is ennobled because the anodic dissolution is ennobled; higher potentials are needed to achieve and maintain the critical pit environment. The influences of Nb in the passive film and in improving passivation via decreased solubility seem to be minor in comparison.

The behavior of the AlCr system may now be understood. Unlike the other systems, Cr alloying does not continually ennoble the repassivation process; it is much harder for a pit in an Al-30%  Cr  alloy  to  repassivate  compared  to  one  in  Al-6%Cr.  This  results  from  the  more effective hydrolysis of Cr ions compared to Al ions. Even though the hydrolysis constant of Al 3+ (≈ 10 -5 M /liter) is extremely high relative to most metallic ions, the hydrolysis constant of Cr 3+ (≈ 10 -4 M /liter)  is  even  higher. 21 As  a  result,  the  critical  pit  environment  may  be  maintained  at  a lower potential (and current density) when more Cr is available to hydrolyze. However, the role of  the  passive  film  on  AlCr  is  stronger  than  in  other  alloy  systems  as  the  pitting  potentials  of freshly  deposited  samples  are  up  to  300  mV  higher  than  the  repassivation  potentials.  It  is  not clear, on the other hand, why aging of AlCr alloys was not always beneficial to pitting resistance and why the aged AlCr samples exhibited such large scatter in pitting potentials.

The AlMn system is also interesting.  It has been shown by Moffat et  al. that,  like  the AlW system, Mn is not present in the passive film on AlMn in chloride solutions. 19 They also point out that this element, which is not known for its passivating properties, has a high solubility in  acids.  Therefore,  the  rationale  of  improved  pitting  resistance  via  decreased  solubility  is  not applicable. The repassivation potentials of these alloys are relatively high but almost equal to the pitting  potential.  It  is  clear  that  the  improvement  in  pitting  resistance  for  AlMn  over  pure  Al results  from  the  requirement  of  noble  potentials  for  the  pits  to  grow.  Even  alloying  with  a relatively active metal like Mn allows this phenomenon to occur.

There are several possible mechanisms by which the solute elements ennoble the pitting process.  As  mentioned  above,  most  ion  including  Mn +2 ,  have  lower  hydrolysis  constants  than Al +3 . 21 So  a  higher  dissolution  rate  would  be  required  in  the  case  of  alloyed  Al  to  maintain  a given pH, compared to pure Al. This also explains the negative influence of Cr additions at high concentrations but not the large effect of the addition of a few percent compared to pure Al.

Alloying  elements  may  also  influence  the  current  efficiency  or  rate  of  hydrogen evolution.  For  instance,  pits  in  AlW  alloys  evolve  massive  amounts  of  hydrogen  gas  during growth. So much so, in fact, that the pit perimeter is obscured and image analysis to determine pit current density is impossible. Hydrogen evolution increases the pH and thus counteracts the influence of hydrolysis.

On the other hand, the addition of more-noble elements to Al, which is extremely active, may simply ennoble the dissolution process, resulting in the need for higher potentials to achieve a given current density. An increase in the reversible potential for metal dissolution, a decrease in  the  exchange  current  density,  or  a  combination  of  the  two  would  result  in  a  shift  of  the dissolution kinetics in the anodic direction. It is reasonable to expect that alloying of Al will have these  effects.  The  notion  that  alloying  of  Al  improves  pitting  resistance  by  affecting  the dissolution process is similar to the results of Newman, who studied the influence of Mo on the pitting resistance of stainless steel. 11,12 In that work, the addition of 1.7 a/o Mo in Fe-Cr and FeCr-Ni  alloys  was  found  to  reduce  the  current  density  of  both  scratched  and  artificial  pit electrodes  held  at  a  given  potential.  By  sputter  deposition,  it  is  possible  to  incorporate  large amounts  of  solute  into  the  matrix.  Even  small  additions  are  extremely  effective  in  Al  alloys because of the active nature of metallic Al. As in the case of Mo in stainless steel, the solute atoms might act by enriching at kink or step sites on the active surface.

Finally,  the  current-potential  curves  show  a  strong  ohmic  contribution.  The  values  of di / dE for the corrosion resistant alloys are lower than that of pure Al, indicating that the ohmic contribution to these curves may be higher than for pure Al It is possible that precipitated oxides of the alloying elements or an alumina gel stabilized by these elements could create a resistive, though  not  passivating,  layer  with  ion-selective  properties  that  alters  the  current-potential relation.

Studies into the passive film chemistry of sputtered Al alloys have provided correlations to  pitting  behavior 1,2,4-7 and  such  a  relation  may  be  intuitive  to  some  investigators.  However, direct  tests  of  causality  have  not  been  furnished.  The  measurements  of  repassivation  potential provide a direct causal link between the influence of alloying on pit growth considerations and the elevation of pitting potential. The data suggest that changes in the passive film chemistry as a result of alloying are much less important.

The fact that the critical pit current densities do not increase with pitting potential for the AlNb and AlCr systems suggests that pit growth is limited by the decreased ability of pits to maintain  the  critical  pit  environment  rather  than  an  increased  ability  to  repassivate.  Since alloying  with  elements  such  as  Mn,  which  should  not  enhance  repassivation,  also  improves pitting resistance, this view of pitting may be generally applicable to the whole class of binary Al alloys that has been studied in recent years.

It has recently been suggested that the improved pitting resistance of AlW alloys results from the possible presence of a metallic layer just beneath the passive film that is enriched in W compared  to  the  bulk  alloy  composition. 22 The  results  of  this  investigation  show  that  the properties of the dilute alloys are sufficient to improve pitting resistance via ennoblement of E R. The  influence  of  a  solute-enriched  metallic  layer  beneath  the  passive  film  would  result  in apparent E R values higher than the E R curves measured here. Since the measured E R values are close to the freshly deposited pitting potentials for most alloy systems, little added benefit of a solute-enriched layer is possible.

It  remains  to  be  explained  how  the  interpretation  of  pitting  described  above  can  be reconciled with the phenomenon of metastable pitting. Metastable pits initiate in Al and its alloys at potentials below E R, grow for short periods, and then repassivate. 23 So metastable pits exhibit some  growth  at  potentials  at  which  stable  pits  would  repassivate.  Apparently,  the  factors controlling  pit  stability  are  different  for  metastable  pits  than  for  stable  pits.  In  stainless  steel, metastable pits were found to be covered by passive film remnants. 24 Rupture of the pit covers was associated with pit repassivation. It is possible that pits in these Al alloys are also covered, allowing  short  metastable  pit  growth  at  low  potentials  and  current  densities.  Given  the  large anodic pit current densities and the extent of hydrogen evolution for Al and its alloys, it might be extremely difficult for a covered pit to retain its cover. In this view, stable pits would not form until the potential was high enough so that the current density was large enough to maintain the critical pit environment in an open pit.

## Conclusions

The pitting and repassivation potentials of sputtered Al binary alloys were determined in a  chloride  solution.  Whereas  the  pitting  potentials  of  many  sputter-deposited  Al  alloys  are  far higher than that for pure Al, they are only slightly higher than the repassivation potentials of the given alloys. This indicates that pit growth considerations play a much larger role than passive film effects in the pitting process for these alloys. Aging by prolonged exposure to air improves the pitting resistance of some alloys by improving the passive film, but the effect is still small copared to growth limitations. The anodic pit current density just prior to repassivation does not increase with increasing solute content and pitting resistance, suggesting that the repassivation and pitting potentials are ennobled by alloying because of a decrease in the ability of the metal to maintain the critical conditions required for pit growth.

## Acknowledgments

Interesting conversations with Tom Moffat are greatly appreciated.

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center assisted in meeting the publication costs of this article.

## References

1.  W. C. Moshier, G. D. Davis, J. S. Ahearn, and H. F.Hough, This Journal, 133 , 1063 (1986).
2.  W. C. Moshier, G. D. Davis, J. S. Ahearn, and H. F.Hough, ibid , 134 , 2677 (1987).
3.  G. S. Frankel, M. A. Russak, C. V. Jahnes, M. Mirza-maani, and V. A. Brusic, ibid , 136 , 1243 (1989).
4.  W. C. Moshier, G. D. Davis, and G. O. Cote, ibid. , 136 , 356 (1989).
5.  G. D. Davis, W. C. Moshier, T. L. Fritz, and G. O. Cote, ibid. , 137 ,422 (1990).
6.  B. A. Shaw, T. L. Fritz, G. D. Davis, and W. C. Moshier, ibid. , 137 , 1317 (1990).
7.  B. A. Shaw, G. D. Davis, T. L. Fritz, B. J. Rees, and W. C. Moshier, in Critical Factors in Localized Corrosion , G.  S.  Frankel  and  R.  C.  Newman,  Editors,  PV  92-9  p.  323,  The  Electrochemical  Society,  Softbound Proceedings Series, Pennington, NJ (1992).
8.  E. McCafferty and P. M. Natishan ibid. , p. 299.
9.  Z. Szklarska-Smialowska, Corros. Set. 33 , 1193 (1992).
10.  G. S. Frankel and R. C. Newman, in Critical Factors in Localized Corrosion , G. S. Frankel and R. C. Newman, Editors, PV-92, p. ix , The Electrochemical Society Softbound Proceedings Series, Pennington, NJ (1992).
11.  R. C. Newman, Corr, Sci. , 25, 331 (1985).
12.  R. C. Newman, ibid. , 25, 341 (1985).
13.  M. Pourbaix, L. Klimzack-Mathieu, C. Mertens, J. Meunier, C. Vanleugenhaghe, L. de Munck, J. Laureys, L. Nellemans, and M. Warzee, ibid. , 3, 239 (1963).
14.  B. E. Wilde and E. Williams, Electrochim. Acta , 16 , 1971 (1971).
15.  B. E. Wilde, in Localized Corrosion , NACE-3, R. W Staehle, B. F. Brown, J. Kruger, and A. Agrawal, Editors, p. 342, NACE, Houston, TX (1974).
16.  G. S. Frankel, Corros. Sci. , 30 , 1203 (1990).
17.  G. S. Frankel, J. O. Dukovic, B. M. Rush, V. Brusic, and C. V. Jahnes, This Journal, 139 , 2196 (1992).
18.  G. S. Frankel, C. V. Jahnes, and M. A. Russak, Corrosion , 45, 630 (1989).
19.    T.  Moffat,  G.  R.  Stafford,  and  D.  E.  Hall,  Abstract  149,  p.  220,  The  Electrochemical  Society  Extended Abstracts, Vol. 93-1 Honolulu, HI, Meeting, May 16-21, 1993; submitted to This Journal.
20.  J. R. Galvele, This Journal , 123 , 464 (1976).
21.  L. G. Sillen and A. E. Martell, Stability Constants of Metal-ion Complexes, 2nd ed., Special publication No. 17, The Chemical Society (Great Britain), London (1964).
22.  G. B. Davis, B. A. Shaw, B. J. Rees, and M. Ferry, This Journal 140 , 951 (1993).
23.  J. Craig, R. C. Newman, and G. S. Frankel, unpublished results.
24.  G. S. Frankel, L. Stockert, F. Hunkeler, and H. Boehni, Corrosion , 43 , 429 (1987).