## SHORT COMMUNICATION

## EFFECT OF  ALLOYED Re ON  THE CRITICAL PITTING POTENTIALS OF  18  %Cr/lO  %Ni STAINLESS STEELS

H. B&amp;w and  H. H. UHLIG

Department of  Metallurgy and Materials Science,  Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Abstract-Stainless steels of  the  18-8 variety  at  25°C  in  O.lN NaCl or  O.lN NaBr show increasingly noble critical pitting potentials, but  at  0°C  decreasingly noble critical potentials with added  per  cent Re. A  likely  cause  is  temperature-sensitive hydration effects within the  double layer.

IN A  RECENT  paper' it  was shown that  MO  alloyed  with  15q,;Cr/l3O/bNi stainless  steel shifted the critical  pitting  potential  in O*lN  NaCl in the noble direction  corresponding to  the well-known  improved  resistance  of  such alloys to pitting  corrosion. The noble shift  of potential,  however, was  shown to occur only  at room and at somewhat  above room temperature (40°C). At  0°C  by way  of contrast,  the effect of MO  was to  lower the  critical pitting potential or  to  shift  it  in  the  active  direction  corresponding  to decreased  resistance to  pitting corrosion.  Immersion  tests in  lO%FeCI, confirmed that  .whereas  pitting of  a 2*4%Mo  stainless  steel did  not  occur  within two  days at 25°C  pitting  was observed under the same  conditions at 0°C. This is opposite to  the effect  found  for 18-8 stainless  steel without MO,  pitting being observed at  25°C but not  at 0°C. It  was of interest to  learn whether alloyed  Re, which is also reported  to improve  pitting resistance  of  18-8 stainless  steeL2 shows  a similar temperature effect.

Alloys  were prepared by  vacuum melting in dense  alumina crucibles decarburized electrolytic Fe, electrolytic  Cr  and carbonyl  Ni,  the latter  supplied by courtesy of the International Nickel  Company.  Re containing  1  Sppm Fe but  less  than  I ppm of  any other detectable  impurity was  supplied  by  courtesy of  Ledgemont  Laboratory, Kennecott  Copper  Corporation. The  melt was cast in a purified  argon atmosphere by  drawing  into  7mm dia.  Vycor tubes and  quenching  in  water.  The  alloys  were homogenized at  1050°C  for  17h, swaged  to O&amp;m dia. rods, annealed  at  1050°C  and water quenched.  They were mostly austenitic as  quenched,  being  only slightly magnetic. Chemical analyses are given  in  Table  1. Electrodes measuring about  2cm  x 04c.m dia. were abraded to 3/O  emery paper and then pickled in lSO/bHNO,, 2%HF  at  80°C. Mounting  of the alloy  specimens using a Teflon gasket to ensure  exposure only  of the *Manuscript received IS  August 1968.

353

TABLE  1. COMPOSITION OF ALLOYS

|       |   %Cr |   %Ni |   %Re |
|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| No. 1 |  17.6 |  10.3 |  0    |
| No. 2 |  17.4 |  10.2 |  0.84 |
| No. 3 |  17.8 |  10   |  1.84 |

FIG. 1 Critical pitting potentials of  18%Cr, lO:dNi, Re stainless  steels in  O.lN NaCI.

<!-- image -->

alloy to  the  electrolyte was the  same  as previously described.' Potentiostatic polarization curves were  obtained at 25°C and at 0°C in N,-saturated 0.1N NaCl and O*lN NaBr. The electrode totally immersed was first  polarized in the least noble passive  region for  15min, then  the  potential was moved in  the  noble direction 50mV every  Smin until the  pitting potential was approximated and the  current showed  a marked increase. This was  followed by  longer-time runs of 12-15h at a single potential in  the  neighbourhood of  the  critical potential in  order  to  establish the  steady state value. The least  noble potential at  which the current did not continuously increase  with  time and  at  which  no  pits  could be observed  under a low  power  microscope was taken  as the  final value.  Reproducibility was f 10-h 15mV.

Critical pitting potentials in O*lN NaCl at  25°C shown  in Fig. 1  indicate that alloyed Re,  like alloyed MO, shifts  the  critical potential in the  noble direction corresponding to  an  increased  resistance  to  pitting corrosion. Similar to  alloyed MO, the shift  at  0°C  is in  the  opposite or  more  active direction. The  75mV decrease at  0°C  on adding 1*84%Re (0*55at.y$), however, is  less  than the corresponding decrease  of almost 500mV  on  adding 1*8q/,Mo (1*05at.%).

The observed  effects in  O*lN NaBr (Fig. 2)  at  25°C  are  somewhat different from those  for  the  MO  stainless  steels in  that  alloyed Re increases the  critical pitting potential whereas alloyed MO  decreases it.  Also  at  WC,  1*84%Re  causes a slight shift  of  critical potential of 30mV  in  the  active  direction whereas 0*5%Mo produces  a change  of  over

FIG. 2. Critical pitting potentials of  18 %Cr,  IO%Ni, Re stainless  steels in[O.lN NaBr

<!-- image -->

1OOmV  in  the same  direction. Stainless steels  of  the  18-8 variety at  25°C are more resistant to  pitting  in NaBr  than in NaCl  but  the critical  potentials indicate that  the alloy  containing  1*8%Re is almost equally resistant in either medium. At  0°C  resistance is better in chlorides than in bromides whether or not the alloys contain Re.

Results requiring  explanation  are (1) the  much more noble critical  potential  for 096Re stainless  steel at  0'  compared to  25°C in  O*lN  NaCl.  On  the other  hand in O.lN  NaBr,  the less  noble critical  potential  at 0°C than  at  25°C. (2) The increase of critical potential brought  about  by  alloyed  Re at  25°C but  the  decrease  at  0°C in either  O.lN  NaCl  or  O*lN  NaBr. (3)  The  greater  sensitivity to  temperature  of  the MO-  compared to the Re-stainless  steels.  As is discussed in the earlier reference1  these effects are not  readily  explained by  temperature coefficients of  diffusion  through  a supposed  oxide film.  The effect of  temperature is more likely  due to  an alteration  of double layer  structure  caused  by  a temperature-dependent hydration  of  the relevant ions and of  the passive  film  itself, thereby  affecting  competitive  adsorption of  anions with  adsorbed oxygen  of the passive  film  for  sites  on the metal surface.

Acklu,wle~ge,ne,lf-This study was aided  by a grant  from  the Office of Saline  Water,  U.S.  Department of  the  Interior.

## REFERENCES

1. J.  HORVATH and  H.  UHLIG,  J. electrochem. Sot. 115, 791  (1968). 2.  N.  TOMASHOV, G.  CHERNOVA  and  0. MARCOVA,  Corrosion 20,
2. 166t  (1964).