## The use of potentiostatic techniques in the development o f   improved stainless steels for chemical plant'

By R. Machin**) and P. Guha**)

## Introduction

The behaviour patterns of  the common conventional stainless steels, both wrought  and cast, in corrosive environments, have been established  over the years, mainly by long term immersion or exposure tests complemented by service experiences. Consequently, the development of steels of improved corrosion resistance has been a slow process mainly because of  the length of  time necessary to produce useful information from such tests. The introduction and development of potentiostatic techniques, however, in recent years have enabled the corrosion behaviour of  stainless steels to be studied in a systematic way by tests of  short duration. The present paper describes the results of such studies in the Authors' laboratory which firstly correlated the known corrosion behaviour of  cast stainless steels in general production with their potentiostatic characteristics and, secondly, used the potentiostat extensively to guide and monitor all stages of  development of an improved stainless steel designated FERRALIUMB)')  alloy. This steel was shown to possess an exceptional resistance to general corrosion in many aggressive environments and especially to attack in crevices or in circumstances normally associated with pitting corrosion.

## Potentiostatic Test Procedure

Potentiostatic studies were carried out using a Wenking potentiostat. The stepping rate during polarisation  was maintained  at  10 mV/min. using a stepping motor. The polarisation cell set-up and electrode holder were as recommended by Greene (1). Polarisation was carried  out according to the recommendations of the ASTM G. 1 Committee. All test solutions were purged with oxygen-free high purity nitrogen. All potentials reported are with reference to a Standard Calomel Electrode (S.C.E.).

## Conventional stainless steels

## (iJ General Corrosion Resistance

Fig. 1 illustrates the typical polarisation  curve in 1 N   sulphuric acid of  a cast  18CrlONi austenitic stainless steel in the annealed condition, showing an active current peak at -300mV  and a passive range extending beyond +800mV. The passivation of  this alloy in oxidizing conditions across this range has been  demonstrated by immersion  tests, for example, in 65% nitric acid (corresponding to a potential of 800mV S.C.E.) and in copper sulphate solution (zero mV S.C.E.) (2). It is considered by the authors, that the passivation of  this type of  steel is related  to its stable austenitic microstructure. For comparison, the limited range of  passivity of a ferritic nickel-free 17% chromium steel (wrought)

*) Vortrag, gehalten anlii3lich der Achema-Tagung 1973  in Frankfurt/M., 20.-21. Juni 1973.

**) Langley Alloys Limited, SLOUGH, England.

1 ) @FERRALIUM is a registered  trademark  of Langley Alloys Limited.

is shown in Fig. 2 in which can also be seen the secondary active peak at around 50mV which is a characteristic  of steels which are wholly or partially ferritic.

105

Fig. 1. Polarisation characteristics of  18CrlONi in  1  N H2S04

<!-- image -->

lo5

Fig. 2. Polarisation  characterlstics of 17 Cr ferritic steel in 1 NHzS04

<!-- image -->

Cast  17%  Chromium steel containing up to 5% Nickel will also show a limited range of passivity and it is only when 8-1 0% Nickel is introduced that a wide passivation  range is observed. With the 18CrlONi composition, a stable austenite is produced, not subject to breakdown to martensite. Although a small amount of stable ferrite may be present,  this does not have any deleterious effect on the cast alloy's general corrosion behaviour.

Molybdenum additions to the cast  18CrlONi steel improve its corrosion behaviour in sulphuric acid and, as shown in Fig. 3, this is reflected in a reduction of the active current peak. Comparison  of Figs.  1 and 3 demonstrates that the passivity of  18Cr  1  ONi3Mo cast material is also maintained to above +800mV (S.C.E.) which is similar to 18CrlONi steel, thereby indicating that, contrary to general opinion, the alloy containing 3 % Molybdenum is as resistant to nitric acid as the Molybdenum-free.

lo5

Fig. 3. Polarisation characteristics.of 18CrlONi3Mo  in 1  N H2SO4

<!-- image -->

The ability to correlate known corrosion behaviour with potentiostatic characteristics  is further emphasised in the case of  LANCALLOY@ '~OV@'), a special cast stainless steel of  basic composition 29%  Nickel,  20% Chromium, and including controlled  amounts of Copper, Molybdenum  and Niobium, This alloy has been shown in service to have an exceptionally  high resistance to corrosion by sulphuric acid, e.g. a corrosion rate of  less than 0.001 inches/year (0.025 mm) is shown in all concentrations of  sulphuric acid at room temperature. This can be correlated  with the polarisation curve in Fig. 4 where the active current peak extends over a much narrower potential range than that shown by the 18CrlONi3Mo steel (Fig. 3), implying a low rate of  corrosion in non-oxidizing conditions. The displacement of the current peak to a more noble potential (-150mV S.C.E.) demonstrates, in particular,  the relative immunity of  this cast alloy to deaerated  sulphuric acid at approximately zero hydrogen potential, i.e. -250m  V S.C.E. (2).

5

Fig. 4. Polarisation characteristics of  Langalloy 2 O v   special stainless steel in 1 N H2SO4

<!-- image -->

## (ii)  Intergranular Corrosion

Susceptibility to intergranular corrosion is normally measured by the Strauss test, wherein the test piece is immersed in boiling Copper Sulphate solution before bending to detect any intergranular attack. These corrosive conditions can be simulated by potentiostatic techniques in sulphuric acid at

-

2 ) @LANGALLOY'  is a registered trademark of Langley Alloys Limited.

a potential of  zero mV (S.C.E.) ( 2 ) . Thus Fig. 5 which shows a secondary peak at zero mV in cast  18CrlONi 0.07C steel after a sensitizing heat-treatment at 650 'C indicates that this material in this condition would not pass the Strauss test, i.e.  it would be susceptible to intergranular corrosion as is well known from actual Strauss tests and from service experience.  It is also known that this susceptibility can be removed by either the addition of a stabilizing element, e.g. Niobium or Titanium or by reducing the carbon content of the steel to a low level (0.03% in some specifications).  Fig. 6 shows however that in the presence of  3% Molybdenum, even with a Carbon content as high as 0.07%, the current peak at zero rpV is absent and that a cast steel of the 18Cr  I ONi3Mo composition, even after a sensitizing heat-treatment, will not show intergranular corrosion. The foregoing conclusions have all been confirmed in the Authors' laboratory by practical Strauss tests. No further

Fig. 5. Polarisation characteristics of  l8CrlONi in 1 N H2S04

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Polarisation characteristics of  18C110Ni3Mo in  1 N H2S04

<!-- image -->

improvement is produced  in the 18Crl  ONi3Mo cast steel by reduction of the Carbon content to 0.035% (Fig. 7). These results show that without need for stabilizing element additions, Carbon contents of up to 0.07% should be acceptable in  I8Cr  10Ni3Mo stainless steel castings.

With regard to the use of  stabilizing elements, of which Niobium is usually  preferred to Titanium by foundries,  the results of  Fig.  8 which shows a polarisation  curve of  an 18CrlONi3MolNb steel indicate an increase in the active current peak compared with a niobium-free casting (Fig. 3). Therefore, a deterioration in performance  in sulphuric acid would be predicted.  Thus the addition of niobium to cast 18CrIONi3Mo steels with up to 0.07%  Carbon, would appear

lo5

Fig. 7. Polarisation  characteristics of low carbon 18CrlONi3Mo in 1 N H2S04

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8. Polarisation characteristics of 18CrlONi3MolNb in 1 N H2SO4

<!-- image -->

not only to be unnecessary in relation to intergranular  corrosion resistance but in fact to be deleterious to general corrosion resistance in some applications.

## (iii)  Pitting Resistance

containing environments is known from practical experience to be poor.  This can also be demonstrated by potentiostatic tests conducted in sodium chloride solution. For example, Fig. 9 shows a breakdown potential of  -50mV (S.C.E.)  for a cast  18CrlONi steel in 3% sodium chloride solution. The pitting resistance of  18CrlONi  steel in chloride-

105

Fig. 9. Polarisation characteristics  of l8CrlONi in 3%  NaCl

<!-- image -->

Introduction of Molybdenum to the 18CrlONi steel modifies this behaviour and improves the pitting resistance in chloride-containing environments, the breakdown potential being raised to 200mV, as shown in Fig.  10. The improvement  is not however sufficient to eliminate pitting in service environments containing chloride.

Fig.  10. Polarisation characteristics  of 18CrlONi3Mo  in 3%  NaCl

<!-- image -->

## (iv) Ferralium alloy

Increase of Chromium content from 18%  to 25% can be shown to produce further improvement  in general corrosion resistance and pitting resistance of a steel containing 10% Nickel and 3%  Molybdenum  and, at this level of Chromium, it has also been demonstrated that reduction of  Nickel content to 5%  produces an excellent  combination  of  these properties.  With adjustments of Molybdenum content and introduction of Copper, an optimum composition has been derived which produces in this proprietary alloy a duplex austenitic-ferritic  (50 : 50) microstructure with excellent resistance to general corrosion, pitting and crevice attack, together with high strength and good ductility. .

This has been designated FERRALIUM alloy and is subject of Patents in the United Kingdom and other countries. Fig.  1  1 shows the remarkably high breakdown potential of the alloy in 3% sodium chloride at approx. +800mV, while the wide passive range in acid conditions, up to approx. +I  OOOmV, accompanied by a low active current peak, shown in comparison with that of  18CrlONi3Mo in ION sulphuric acid in Fig.  12, indicates the high resistance to corrosion in a wide range of oxidizing and non-oxidizing

Fig. 11. Polarisation  characteristics  of Ferralium alloy in 3%  NaCl

<!-- image -->

lo5

Fig. 12. Polarisation characteristics of Ferralium and 18CrlONi3Mo ~ 1 1 0 N HzS04

<!-- image -->

environments. These facts have been confirmed by laboratory immersion tests in acidified ferric-chloride and in various acids and in service applications.

The very small secondary peak at approx. +50mV in Fig.  12 is a characteristic  of  ferrite in the microstructure of the new alloy (cf. Fig. 2) and is not related to any intergranular corrosion tendencies, such as previously  discussed in relation to sensitized  fully austenitic steels.

alloy and the various other alloys discussed is presented as an isocorrosion chart in Fig.  13. This has been compiled from immersion tests which confirm the conclusions drawn from studies of polarisation  characteristics. A summary of the behaviour in sulphuric acid of the new

The second part of this paper will describe how the potentiostat provided  details of  the influence of  compositional and processing variables during the development  of the new alloy, and thereby assisted in finalising both the composition and the optimum production procedures.

## Alloy development

cast stainless steel of  high strength and hardness with corThe initial object of  this development was to produce a rosion resistance at least equivalent to that of austenitic steels of  the  18Cr  1  ONi3Mo type.  The composition ranges studied were based on 25 7 6 Chromium, 5 % Nickel, with controlled amounts of Molybdenum  and Copper. This steel has a duplex 50 : 50 austenitic ferritic microstructure, known to provide high strength, which was enhanced by introduction of a precipitation-hardening  mechnism. Stage 1 of  the development determined the effects of variation in composition and heat-treatment on mechanical properties. Preliminary corrosion tests were also carried out during Stage  1 and these demonstrated that, in addition to the excellent combination of  mechanical properties available, the alloy range being studied possessed corrosion resistance superior to that of the  18Cr 1 ONi3Mo austenitic stainless steel in many environments and that its pitting resistance in the presence of  chloride was better than that of  any austenitic stainless steel. Potentiostatic studies  were thereafter used in Stage I1 of  the development to optimise composition and heat-treatment in relation to corrosion resistance.

Fig. 14 shows the results obtained from constant potential current/time studies in sodium chloride solution with

-t

Fig.  14. Effect of nickel content on pitting realstance in 3%  NaCl -base composition 25Cr3Cu2.5Mo

<!-- image -->

- -potential 600 MV (S.C.E.)
- -temp.  30 OC
- -Nz purged

Fig. 13. Sulphuric acid Material selection guide based on corrosion rate of 0.0015 inches/ month (0.5 mm/year) Corrosion tests under plant conditions advised when possible

<!-- image -->

steels of varying nickel contents from 3.5-8.5% on a base alloy composition of  25Cr3Cu2.5Mo. From these it was found that pitting resistance reduced  significantly when the Nickel content was outside the range 5%-6%  approx. Similar tests on a 5 % Nickel steel with varying Chromium contents showed that for optimum pitting resistance, the Chromium content should be maintained  above 24.5 %, as indicated in Fig.  15. Likewise, Fig.  16 shows how a Copper content of at least 0.5%  was found to be necessary in this steel to produce good pitting resistance.

3 0

<!-- image -->

1-

Fig. 15. Effect of chromium content on pitting potential in 3% NaCl

- -base composition 5Ni3Cu2.5Mo
- -potential 600 MV (S.C.E.)
- -temp.  30 'C
- -N2 purged
- -potential 600 MV (S.C.E.)
- -temp. 30 O C
- -Nz  PWged

Fig. 16. Effect of copper content on pittmg resistance 111 3% NaCl -base composition 25Cr5Ni2.5Mo

<!-- image -->

Further studies showed that heat-treatment and microstructure had significant effects on resistance to corrosion and especially pitting. Fig.  17 shows how the low pitting resistance  in chloride of  an as-cast structure is raised by solution treatment at  1120 'C.  A subsequent ageing treatment at 500 'C. produces the optimum combination of mechanical properties but has little effect on the good pitting resistance  obtained after annealing.

At this stage it was concluded  that an alloy could be produced  which, when suitably heat-treated, would  possess the required  combination of:

- (a) High strength
- (b) Good ductility
- (c)  Good corrosion resistance to oxidizing and non-oxidizing chemical environments.
- (d) High pitting resistance in the presence of  chloride ions.

lo5

Fig. 17. Effect of solution treatment on polarisation characteristics in 3%  NaCl

<!-- image -->

- -composition 25CrSNi3Cu2.5Mo
- -temp.  30 O C
- -N2 purged

The composition of the new alloy was established with the following nominal alloy contents:

| Chromium   | Nickel   | Copper   | Molybdenum   |
|------------|----------|----------|--------------|
| 25 %       | 5.5 %    | 3.0%     | 2.5%         |

In addition to the successful production of  complex  castings, hot and cold working characteristics of  the alloy were studied to enable all wrought forms to be made available together with welding consumables for the fabrication of the alloy. Potentiostatic tests were used at this stage to monitor the effects of  hot working variables on corrosion resistance.

The new alloy has been in commercial production for several years and constant potential tests are currently used in production quality control of wrought  and cast materials to ensure that a consistently  high level of corrosion resistance and pitting resistance is maintained.  The results of potentiostatic and laboratory controlled immersion tests during its development have been fully confirmed in field tests and by commercial applications. The high degree of resistance shown in many aggressive conditions has resulted in its extensive use in handling, for example, mineral acids, chloride solutions, hydroxides.

## Summary

It has been shown that the behaviour of cast stainless steels of various types in a variety of  corrosive conditions can be closely correlated with the results of  potentiostatic tests. Conversely,  potentiostatic techniques can accurately predict  the corrosive behaviour of  unfamiliar combinations of alloy and chemical environment. Such techniques provide an approach to the development  of corrosion resistant alloys which is economic of  time, labour and material. They have been used successfully in the development  and production quality control of  a new alloy, which has an exceptionally good combination of  mechanical properties abd resistance to general corrosion and to pitting or crevice attack.

in chemical environments are illustrated  in Figs.  18-20. In conclusion, several successful applications of this alloy

Fig.  18?hows  a cast impeller of  a type which has given three years satisfactory  service in 'wet process' phosphoric acid production handling acid slurries containing approximately 30 % P 2 0 5 , 30 % CaSo,,  solids, 2 % H2 SO4, HF and H2SiF6 at 60°-800C.

Fig. 18. Cast Ferralium alloy impeller for 'wet process' phosphoric acid production

<!-- image -->

Fig.  19 shows a cast impeller of a pump handling sulphuric acid and other corrosive cargoes in a multi-purpose  chemical tanker.

Fig. 19. Cast Ferralium alloy impeller for cargo pump of multipurpose chemical tanker

<!-- image -->

Fig. 20 illustrates a marine propeller  in cast alloy which, since it is unmarked by general corrosion, pitting or crevice attack after four years immersion in sea water, clearly demonstrates the suitability of the new alloy for applications in chloride-containing environments.

Fig. 20. Marine propeller  in Ferralium alloy, completely uncorroded after four years immersion in sea-water

<!-- image -->

(Eingegangen:  Juli 1973)

## References

1. N. D. Greene: Experimental  Electrode Kinetics, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, N.  York,  1965.
2. M. Pourbaix and F. Vandervelden: Corrosion Science 5 (1965) No.  2.