## Improvements in corrosion resistance, mechanical properties, and weldability of duplex a  u s  t  en  it  i c/f  e  r r  i t  i c s  t  ee  I s*

Verbesserung der Korrosionsbestandigkeit,  der mechanischen Eigenschaften  und der SchweiRbarkeit von austenitisch-ferritischen Stahlen

C. A.  Clark and P. Guha**

Korrosionsverhalten, Festigkeit und  SchweiDbarkeit von  nichtrostenden  Stahlen  mit  Duplex-Gefiige konnen  durch  entsprechende Zusammensetzung  und Einstellung des Austenit : Ferrit-Verhaltnisses im Grundwerkstoff  und im SchweiRgut  verbessert werden. Zusatz von Stickstoff verbessert die Duktilitat und die Lochkorrosionsbestandigkeit;  diese  wird  ebenfalls verbessert  durch  erhohte  Chromgehalte, welche  die  Passivierungsschicht stabilisieren.  Diese  Wirkung wird noch  verstarkt  durch Zusatz von  Molybdan, das jedoch  bestimmte Grenzen  nicht  iiberschreiten darf,  da  sonst  die  Gefahr  der SigmaPhasen-Sprodigkeit  bei hoheren Temperaturen besteht . Auch Kupfer i n Mengen bis 13% verbessert die Korrosionsbestandigkeit  besonders in Meerwasser, doch sollte wegen der abtraglichen Wirkung auf  die Warmzahigkeit ein  bestimmter  Gehalt  nicht  iiberschritten werden. Wegen der wichtigen Rolle von Nickel fur das Austenit : Ferrit-Verhatnis  (vorzugsweise 50 : 50)  muB  der  Nickelgehalt  entsprechend gewahlt werden und sollte im SchweiRgut etwas erhoht werden.

and ferrite phases, the austenite imparting toughness and general  corrosion  resistance,  and  the ferrite  imparting  strength and resistance  to stress  corrosion  cracking.  These were first introduced  for castings in the mid-1930's  but did not initially gain much  favour, as the microstructure  was not  adequately controlled,  resulting  in embrittlement and failure  to achieve the potential  corrosion resisting  capabilities.  Wrought duplex steels, containing about 1.5% molybdenum,  were introduced in Germany in the late 1920's [2], but were only regarded as having corrosion resistance equivalent to the 316-type steels, their main attribute being much increased strength. The major advance was achieved  by  the addition  o f   copper  to give the cast alloy CD 4 MCu [3] developed by the Alloy Casting Institute of  America.

However, this alloy can suffer from lack of toughness which can lead to problems during welding and difficulties in avoiding fettling cracks and quench  cracks when  cutting and  heat treating castings of  heavy section.

This  paper indicates  how  variations  in  composition  affect the properties of  duplex steels and gives the characteristics of two such  steels,  developed subsequent to CD4MCu, whose compositions  have  been balanced  to optimise  microstructure and provide attractive combinations of   corrosion characteristics,  mechanical properties, and ease of  production.

The  corrosion  behaviour,  toughness  and  weldability  of duplex stainless steel  can  be  improved by  controlling the  composition and austenite :ferrite  ratio  in  the  base  metal  and  in  the  weld  deposits. Addition of  nitrogen is beneficial to ductility and restistance to pitting corrosion; the latter is also improved by increased chromium contents which stabilize  the passive film. This effect is further enhanced by the addition of  molybdenum which, however, should not  exceed sigma phase at high temperatures.  Copper in amounts up to 1.5% improves the resistance to marine environments; however, a certain upper limit should not be exceeded because of  adverse effects on hot ductility. In view of  the function of nickel concerning the austenite : ferrite  ratio (which should be about 50 : 50) the nickel content should be appropriately selected and should be higher in the filter metal.

## Introduction

When considering materials for the construction of  chemical plant and  for  applications  in  marine  environments, the austenitic stainless steels have limitations associated with their low strength, and, under appropriate conditions, susceptibility to  stress  corrosion,  pitting  corrosion, and  crevice  corrosion. The higher alloyed fully austenitic steels, with nickel contents in excess o f 25%, which may be specified for the more corrosive acid environments such as sulphuric and phosphoric acids and sour oil well  conditions,  also present welding  problems due to lack  of  hot  strength leading  to  fissuring in  the weld metal  [l].  Changes  in  the  design  of  chemical  plant  to  give higher  yields  often  involve  higher  service  temperatures  and more concentrated  and corrosive media, with a corresponding need  for  improved  materials.  The  duplex  austenitic-ferritic steels of  high chromium content were therefore developed in an attempt to combine the advantages of  both the austenite

* Lecture presented at the ACHEMA 82 -20. Chemical Engineering Exhibition-Congress,  FrankfurtM, June 6-12,  1982.

and Manager, Research and Technical  Process  Control, of Bonar Langley Alloys Ltd.,  Slough U.K. ** Dr. C.A.  Clark and P. Guha are respectively  Technical Director

## Variations in composition and microstructure

## a) Nitrogen

The most significant improvement in both corrosion characteristcs  and  mechanical  properties, compared with nitrogenfree duplex  steels is obtained by  the  addition  of  nitrogen in excess of  0.1%. Studies on castings of  large section, indicated that addition of  nitrogen increases the pitting potential in 3% NaCl  solution  at  30°C  from  0.45  V  (S.H.E.)  to  1.15 V (S.H.E.) for steels containing approximately 25% Cr, 5% Ni, 2.4% Mo, and 3% Cu. When steels of  this composition in the form of  thick sections (76 mm) were solution treated and then aged it was found that the nitrogen-free steel was brittle, giving zero elongation during tensile testing, whilst the nitrogencontaining steel gave an elongation above 20% [4].

In CD  4MCu, where nitrogen is not added, it is necessary to limit the carbon content to a maximum  of  0.04% in order to avoid intercrystalline  corrosion  and weld  decay in nitric acid tests [5], whereas a maximum of 0.08% carbon can be permitted in steels of  similar composition to which nitrogen has been added,  thus  reducing  composition  control  problems  during selection of raw materials, melting operations, and recycling of remelt.  Further  beneficial  effects  of  nitrogen,  on  the pitting resistance of steels of  carbon content greater than 0.04% are illustrated in Figure 1.

Fig. 1. The effect of nitrogen additions on the pitting potentials in 0.07% carbon

<!-- image -->

Abb.1.EinfluB von Stickstoff-Zusatzen auf dieLochkorrosionspotentialein3%igerNaCl-Losungvon30°Cfuraustenitisch-ferritische Stahlemitetwa0,04und0,07%Kohlenstoff

The nitrogen addition reinforces nickel in acting as an austenite stabiliser, but also appears to modify the austenite-ferrite ratio  at  which  maximum  pitting  resistance  is  achieved.  For example  the  CD 4 MCu  composition  appears to  have  been optimised  to  give  an austenite-ferrite ratio  of 25-27 [3], whereas  similar steels containing  about 0.15%  nitrogen  give maximum resistance to pitting with an austenite-ferrite ratio of about 50-50.

## b) Nickel

With other elements constant, it is found that the optimum pitting  resistance is achieved by selecting a nickel content  to give an austenite-ferrite ratio of  about 50%. In a steel containing 25%Cr, 3% Cu, 2.5% Mo, and 0.15% N for example, the maximum pitting  potential in  3% NaCl  at 30°C is achieved when the nickel content is about 5.2%.  The pitting potentials in 3% NaCl at 30°C for steels of  varying nickel contents  are illustrated in Fig. 2. For a steel of composition 28% Cr, 1.5% Cu, 2.5% Mo and 0.15% N, the optimum nickel content for maximum resistance to pitting combined with good toughness is about 8%.

lo5

Fig. 2. Effect o f   increasing nickel, above the optimum, on the pitting potentials of  duplex steels in 3% NaCl at 30°C

<!-- image -->

Abb 2. Einflulj der Erhohung des Nickelgehalts uber  den optimalen Wert  auf  die  Lochkorrosionspotentiale von  austenitisch-ferritischen Stahlen in 3%iger NaC1-Losung bei 30°C

It is therefore considered  that the main role of  nickel is to control the microstructure, rather than to modify the corrosion resistance per se. If  nickel contents are significantly in excess of   the optimum, so that the austenite content increases above 50%  the  residual  ferrite  becomes  increasingly  enriched  in chromium,  a  ferrite  stabiliser.  This  high-chromium  ferrite more readily transforms to brittle sigma phase at temperatures in the range 7O0-95O0C, with adverse effects on hot working characteristics  for  wrought  steels,  impact  toughness  of  cast steels, and weldability.

Conversely,  if the  nickel  content  is  reduced  below  the optimum, leading to high ferrite contents,  low toughness will again result  because the delta ferrite formed immediately  on solidification  also  tends  to  have  low  ductility. As indicated later, this effect is also significant when considering the weldability of  duplex steels.

## c)  Chromium and molybdenum

Both chromium and molybdenum are beneficial in increasing the pitting resistance of stainless steels generally. Thus, for a duplex steel containing 5% Ni, 3% Cu, 2.5% Mo, and 0.15% N, increase in chromium  from 22.5%  to 28%  decreased  the pitting current density monotonically in 3% NaCl solution at an applied potential of 850 mV from 310 pA/cm2  to 20 pA/cm2.

As reported  by Oldfield and Sutton [6] and by Brigham [7] both chromium  and molybdenum  also improve resistance to crevice corrosion.  Molybdenum is regarded  as more effective than  chromium,  but  in  practice  it  is  desirable  to  limit  the molybdenum content because it strongly promotes the formation  o f   sigma phase  [8]. This may lead to adverse effects on properties following welding or processing o f   steels in the temperature range  700-950°C. In practice  therefore it has been found convenient to hold the molybdenum content within the range 2-3%,  improve passivation characteristics by increasing chromium,  and  control  the  austenite-ferrite  ratio  by  corresponding  adjustments  to the nickel content.

## d) Copper

It has been shown that additions of  copper to a duplex steel in amounts up to about 1.0% are beneficial  in increasing the pitting resistance in 3% NaCl solution, but that higher copper contents give little further improvement  [9]. However higher copper contents are beneficial in lower pH environments that are  experienced  in  sour  oil  wells,  polluted  sea  water,  and chemical process  plant, particularly  under conditions of  high flow velocity leading to erosion and cavitation, although under very severe conditions of this kind, the more expensive super austenite steels or high nickel alloys might be required. High copper contents, however,  tend  to reduce hot  ductility  and weldability so that for wrought duplex steels copper is usually limited to a maximum of  about 2% and for the cast steels to about 3%. Copper is a weak austenite stabiliser and therefore slightly reinforces the effects of nickel and nitrogen on microstructure.

The  general effects of the variations in composition, described above, on corrosion resistance and mechanical properties are illustrated in Fig. 2 and 3 and Table 1  respectively. It is  seen  that  the  impact  toughness  for  material  in  the  aged condition is particularly sensitive to deviation from  the optimum composition.

Table 1. Effect o f   variations in nitrogen, chromium, and nickel contents on the mechanical properties of duplex steels containing approximately 2.5% Mo and 3% Cu (solution treated and age hardened condition)

Tabelle 1. EinfluO  verschiedener  Stickstoff-, Chrom- und  Nickelgehake  auf  die  mechanischen  Eigenschaften  von  austenitisch-ferritischen  Stahlen  mit  etwa  2,5% Mo  und  3%  Cu  (Iosungsgegliiht und ausscheidungsgehartet

|   % Cr |   % Ni |   % N2 |   0.5% N/mZ |   P.S. U.T.S. N/m2 |   % El |   impact joules strength |
|--------|--------|--------|-------------|--------------------|--------|--------------------------|
|   24.9 |    5.5 |   0.05 |         664 |                873 |     15 |                     13.5 |
|   25.2 |    5.3 |   0.17 |         649 |                840 |     25 |                     57   |
|   25.2 |    8.5 |   0.15 |         564 |                840 |     29 |                     50   |
|   28.3 |    4.9 |   0.13 |         788 |               1004 |     18 |                      9.5 |
|   28.2 |    7.8 |   0.16 |         757 |               1016 |     24 |                     34   |

## Properties of duplex steels with optimum compositions

Using the principles  outlined  in the previous  section,  two duplex steels have been developed showing significant improvements in toughness, weldability and corrosion characteristics, compared with CD 4 MCu. The compositions, typical

!i

&gt;

+

L

&lt;-

a

i ^

x

+

U

<!-- image -->

3

Fig. 3. Effect o f   copper content on pitting resistance in 3% NaCl  at 30°C and on corrosion rate in 70% H2S04 at 60°C

Abb. 3. EinfluR des Kupfergehalts auf  die Lochkorrosionsbestandigkeit  in  3%iger  NaC1-Losung  bei  30 "C  und  auf  die  Korrosionsgeschwindigkeit in 70%iger Schwefelsaure bei 60 "C

microstructures,  and  typical  mechanical  properties  of  these commercial  steels,  designated  FERRALIUM* alloy 255 and FERRALIUM alloy 288 respectively,  are shown for comparison with ASTM A 743 CD 4 MCu, CF  8  M and a cast 20-type alloy developed for sour oil well applications in Tables 2 and 3 respectively.

Pitting potentials in 3% NaCl solution are plotted as a function  o f   temperature for some of  these steels in Fig. 4, whilst comparative  corrosion  data  in  sulphuric  acid  are  shown  in Fig.  5.

Resulting from these properties, FERRALIUM alloy 255 is regarded as a good general purpose stainless steel, combining high strength and notch ductility, with good resistance to pitting, crevice corrosion, and stress corrosion in marine environments and good resistance to corrosion in most oxidising acid environments. Because  of its  higher  alloy  content  FERRALIUM alloy 288 has superior resistance to the 255 alloy in sulphuric acid under critical  conditions of  concentration  and temperature, and indeed is almost as good in this environment as the much more expensive 20-type alloy. The 288 alloy has also  shown  excellent  corrosion  and erosion  resistance  under certain critical conditions in the wet process for the production of   fertiliser  grade phosphoric  acid.

The improved ductility resulting from the addition of  nitrogen enables FERRALIUM alloy 255 to be produced  in both

* FERRALIUM is a registered trade mark of  Bonar Langley Alloys Ltd., U.K.

15214176, 1983, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/maco.19830340105 by Universitäts- Und Landesbibliothek Düsseldorf, Wiley Online Library on [24/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Table 2. Designation,  composition and typical microstructures of stainless steels Tabelle 2. Bezeichnung, Zusammensetzung und typisches Mikrogefiige von nichtrostenden  Stahlen

|                     | Designation Composition   | Designation Composition   | Designation Composition   | Designation Composition   |           | Mo        | Typical microstructure                                   |
|---------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------|
|                     | C*                        | N                         | Cr                        | Ni                        | c u       |           |                                                          |
| FERRALIUM alloy 255 | 0.08                      | 0.1 min                   | 24-27                     | 4.5-6.5                   | 1.3-4     | 2-4       | 50/50 austenite-ferrite                                  |
| FERRALIUM alloy 288 | 0.08                      | 0.1 min                   | 26-29                     | 6-9                       | 0.75-1.75 | 2-3       | 50/50 austenite-ferrite                                  |
| ASTM A 743 CD4MCu   | 0.04                      | -                         | 24.5-26.5                 | 4.75-6                    | 2.75-3.25 | 1.75-2.25 | 25175 austenite-ferrite 5-15% ferrite, balance austenite |
| CF 8M               | 0.08                      | - Nb                      | 18-21                     | 9-12                      | -         | 2-3       |                                                          |
| Cast 20-type        | 0.07                      | 8 X % C                   | 20-22                     | 26-31                     | 1.5-2.5   | 3.5-4.5   | fully austenitic                                         |

Table 3. Typical mechanical properties of  stainless steels TabeUe 3. Typische mechanische Eigenschaften von nichtrostenden  Stahlen

| Designation                             | Heat treatment                                             | 0.2% P.S. N/mmz   | U.T.S. N/mm2   | El., %   | Impact, joules   |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------|----------|------------------|
| FERRALIUM alloy 255 FERRALIUM alloy 255 | solution treat 1120"C, W.Q.* solution treat + age at 510°C | 530 650           | 780 880        | 30 28    | 120 70           |
| FERRALIUM alloy 288                     | solution treat 1120°C, W.Q.                                | 500               | 800            | 25       | 65               |
| ASTM A 743CD4MCu                        | S.T. * 1120"C, furnace cool to 1040"C, W.Q.                | 550               | 770            | 15       | 40,              |
| CF8M                                    | solution treat 1O5O0C,W.Q.                                 | 225               | 510            | 45       | 100              |
| Cast 20-type                            | solution treat 1120"C,W.Q.                                 | 245               | 550            | 35       | 90               |

cast and wrought forms, whereas CD 4 MCu, in which nitrogen is not deliberately  added, is available only as castings.

Fig. 4. Pitting potentials as a function of  temperature Abb. 4. Temperaturabhangigkeit der Lochkorrosionspotentiale

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5. Sulphuric acid  corrosion  chart  based  on maximum corrosion rate of  0.5 mdyear Abb. 5. Isokorrosionsdiagramm fur Schwefelsaure mit maximal 0,5 m d a   Abtragung

<!-- image -->

## Welding duplex steels

The duplex steels consist wholly of delta ferrite on solidification from the melt. During cooling, partial transformation  to austenite occurs, so that at room temDerature the microstructure consists of pools  of  austenite  in' a  ferrite  matrix.  I f   the

steel is worked,  the austenite phase,  being  ductile, becomes elongated  along  the  direction  o f deformation.  It  has  been shown that because of their very high cooling rate, weld metal deposits  produced  from  matching  filler  rods  by  the  manual metal arc technique, contain a somewhat higher ferrite content and also have a more acicular microstructure than the parent metal [ll]. Because delta femte tends to have low ductility the net  effect  of  these  microstructural  differences  is  to  impart lower toughness to weld metal compared with parent material of the same composition. This low toughness can lead to cracking  in  the  weld  metal  when  producing  thick  section  welds under severe restraint. The  problem was overcome by developing electrodes of higher nickel content (6.9%) so as to produce  weld  deposits  of  higher  austenite  content  than  the parent  metal,  FERRALIUM  255.  Although  the microstructure  was  still  very  acicular  the  ductility  was  satisfactorily restored as shown in Table 4. Measurements of pitting potentials in 3% NaCl solution indicated that weld deposits from the higher nickel electrodes had similar characteristics to those of the parent metal.

Table 4. Mechanical properties  of  weld  deposits from electrodes of matching composition and from high nickel electrodes in comparison with the parent duplex steel

Tabelle 4. Mechanische Eigenschaften  des SchweiDgutes  von Elektroden mit artgleicher  Zusammensetzung  und von Elektroden mit erhohtem  Nickelgehalt, bezogen  auf  den  Grundwerkstoff mit  Austenit : Ferrit-Gefiige

|                                                                            | Parent metal   | Depositsfrom matching- electrodes   | Depositsfrom electrodesof high nickel content (6.9%)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Austenite content, %                                                       | 50             | 45                                  | 80                                                     |
| Impact strength, joules as deposited solutiontreated at                    | -              | 1 9                                 | 54                                                     |
| 1120°C                                                                     | 120            | 110                                 | 120                                                    |
| solutiontreated and aged at 51OOC                                          | 70             | 10                                  | 85                                                     |
| Elongation, % as deposited solution treated solutiontreated and aged       | -              | 6                                   | 10                                                     |
|                                                                            | 30             | 28                                  | 29                                                     |
|                                                                            | 28             | 7                                   | 26                                                     |
| as deposited solution treated solution treated and Tensile strength, N/mmz | -              | 865                                 | 900                                                    |
| aged                                                                       | 780 880        | 780 935                             | 775 930                                                |

In  a  more  recent  development  electrodes  of  higher  nickel content (10%) have also been made available for use with the higher  alloyed  duplex  steel,  FERRALIUM  alloy  288.  The weld deposits again possess equivalent mechanical properties and pitting potential to the parent metal.

## Conclusions

1. The addition  of  nitrogen  to duplex  steels  is  beneficial to both ductility and resistance to pitting corrosion.  The maximum  permitted  carbon  content  can  also  be  raised  from 0.04 to 0.08%, when nitrogen is added, without adversely affecting resistance to pitting and intercrystalline corrosion.
2. The most important function of nickel in duplex steels is to balance the austenite-ferrite microstructure and it is considered that a 50-50  ratio gives optimum properties.
3. Pitting current  density measurements  in 3% NaCl at 30°C with  varying  chromium  contents indicate  that  increasing chromium content improves the stability of the passive film.
4. Molybdenum reinforces the beneficial effects of chromium but  has to be  limited  because  of  cost and  its  tendency  to promote the formation of  brittle  sigma phase at high temperatures.
5. Copper in amounts up to 1.5% improves pitting resistance in marine environments, and higher levels are beneficial in low pH solutions.  The practical upper limits for copper in duplex steel castings and wrought products are restricted by adverse effects on hot ductility.
6. Because  of  the  high  quench  rates  during  welding operations, weld deposits from electrodes of  matching composition tend to have higher ferrite contents, more acicular microstructures,  and  lower  ductilities  than  the parent  metal. Welding  consumables  for  duplex  steels  should  therefore preferably  contain  higher  nickel  contents  than  the parent metal.
7. Two  commercial  duplex  steels,  FERRALIUM  alloy 255 (25Cr,  5Ni,  Mo,  Cu,  N)  and  FERRALIUM  alloy  288, (28 Cr, 8  Ni, Mo, Cu, N) together with compatible welding electrodes,  have been developed  using the principles outlined  above.  The former steel, in  both  cast  and  wrought forms, has found wide application in marine environments and chemical process plant. The latter steel, in the form of castings,  is  finding  increasing  application  in  more  critical applications,  including  the  production  of 'wet'  process phosphoric  acid.

## References

- 1 . W. T. Delong: Welding Journal 7 (1974)  2 7 3 - 2 8 6 .
2.  R. Oppenheim: Dechema-Monographien 36 (1959)  1 0 8 - 1 2 0 , s. a. Ind. Anz. 8 1 (1959) 13-20.
3. J .   W .   Flowers, F. H .  Beck,  M .  G .   Fontana: Corrosion 19 (1963) 186  t - 1 9 8 t.
- 4 . W. H. Richardson, P. Guha: British Corrosion Journal 14 (1979) 167-170.
5. E. A.  Schoefer: Chemical Engineering (March 1960 ) pp. 164-168.
6. J. W.  Oldfield, W.  H. Sutton: British Corrosion Journal 15 (1980) 31-3 4 .
7. R. J. Brigham: Corrosion 37 (1981) 608.
8. H.  Goldschmidt: Iron  and  Steel Institute  Symposium on 'High Temperature Steels and Alloys for Gas Turbines', Special  Report No. 43 (1951) p. 24 9 .
9. R. Machin, P. Guha: Werkstoffe u. Korrosion 1 (1974) 40-45.
- 10 . G. Phi, J. Weber: Sulzer Technical Review (February 1979 ) pp. 69-80.
11. D. Blumfield, C. A. Clark,  P. Guha: Metal Construction (May 1981) pp. 269-273.

(Received: 14.6. 1982)

W 2255

15214176, 1983, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/maco.19830340105 by Universitäts- Und Landesbibliothek Düsseldorf, Wiley Online Library on [24/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License