<!-- image -->

## 0010-938X(93)E0021-I

## A  CREVICE-FREE ELECTRODE ASSEMBLY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF  REPRODUCIBLE BREAKDOWN POTENTIALS FOR STAINLESS STEELS IN  HALIDE ENVIRONMENTS

W.  M.  CARROLL and E. E. LYNSKEY

Chemistry  Department, University College Galway,  Galway,  Ireland

Abstract--In the present  study,  a 316 wire loop electrode system has been shown  to give good reproducible results in  a  variety of  halide environments. An unusual  feature of  these results is the  fact that under  all experimental conditions  tudied, the  Br-  ion  is found  to  be  considerably (approx. 200  mV) more aggressive than  the  CI-  ion  in  terms  of  oxide  stability. This  trend is  also  maintained with  steels 302 and 304L. The presence of  SO  2-  ions in  the  halide electrolyte does  not  alter this order, nor  does  chemical pre-treatment in  acid  solutions prior to  pitting potential determinations. Pitting potentials measured  for the  316  wire  loop  samples  are  considerably more noble  than  those measured  for samples  of  316  cut  from bar  or  sheet material. It is tentatively suggested that this order of  oxide  stability may be  due  to  the  superior ability of  C1- to  adsorb at  flaws in  the  developing oxide  film, the  wire  loop  samples  containing fewer  such flaws.

## INTRODUCTION

The breakdown  of  passivity, which  leads to  localized corrosion, is a  very  common type  of  failure  ncountered with  stainless steels. The pitting and  crevice corrosion behaviour of  stainless steels has  been  studied extensively in  environments containing aggressive ions similar to  those found  in  their operating conditions, and  reviewed by a  number of  workers. 1-6 Most  work however  has  been  done  in  solutions containing C1- as  the  aggressive ion. This  is presumably because chlorides are  most  commonly encountered in  environments such  as  sea-water, pulp  and paper  processing and chemical plants in  general. It is believed that C1-  ions are  the most  aggressive anions for the  pitting and  crevice corrosion attack on  stainless steels. 7's

Experimental arrangements or  procedures for  the  determination of  the  pitting susceptibility of  stainless steels in  halide environments are  many and  varied. 9'1° The accuracy and  reliability of  such  tests however, depend  very  markedly on  the working assemblies used, one  of  the  most  important considerations being  that the  electrode system  should be  crevice-free. This  is particularly so  if the  tests are  to  be  conducted over  extended  periods of  time  or  at  elevated temperatures. Pitting susceptibility results obtained for steel samples  mounted  in  epoxy  resin, waxed samples  or  those involving O-ring  seals must  therefore always  be treated with  a  certain amount of care, particularly in  their extrapolation to  industrial situations.

It  is  of  considerable importance  therefore that  new, crevice-free electrode systems  be developed  and tested. In  these laboratories the  crevice-free electrode

Fig.  I. (a)  Crevice-free electrode for  steel bar  samples  of  316L.  (b)  Wire loop  electrode system.

<!-- image -->

system  shown in  Fig.  la  has  been  used  with  reasonable success, particularly for potentiostatic tests in  halide solutions, t1-13 Here  the  teflon collar, when filled with argon  gas  prevents the  ingress of  the  test solution thus avoiding the  development of crevice geometries. However considerable  ffort and dexterity is  involved in  the machining  and  polishing of  the  cylindrical test samples, so  that only  the  transverse surface of  the specimen  is exposed  to  the  electrolyte solution.

In  an attempt to  find  an easier and more rapid  test procedure various other crevice-free electrode assemblies were examined.  The present  communication details the  results obtained using  a wire  loop  type  electrode t4  when exposed  in bromide  and  chloride solutions.

## EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

Unless  otherwise stated the  test electrodes were  made from  0.25  mm  wire  looped  to  a  diameter of 25  mm. The  electrodes were  attached to  the  holder as  indicated in  Fig. lb  and  immersed  to  half distance to give an  exposed  surface area of  0.32 cm  2. Apart  from  a  washing  in  distilled water  and  methanol, the  wires were used  in  the  as-received state. Test  solutions were prepared  from reagent grade  chemicals and distilled water  and  the  pH value was adjusted using HaSO 4  or  NaOH  as  required. The oxygen  content of the  test solutions was  reduced to  a  negligible value by  bubbling nitrogen through them  for a  period of  24  h. All  electrochemical measurements  were  performed  in  a  conventional three electrode glass cell, purged with  nitrogen during  each experiment, the  potential controlled and the  currents measured using  a Princeton Applied  Research  Model 273 potentiostat/galvanostat and associated Model 342 Softcorr corrosion measurement  software. Prior to  each  measurement  the  sample  was introduced into the  test

I

<!-- image -->

10

Fig. 2.  (a) The  variation of  Ep  with  logarithmic halide concentration for steel 316L,  pH 4. (b) The variation of  Ep  with  pH for steel 316L in 0.5  M  CI-  and  0.5  M  Br-  solutions.

electrolyte at  a cathodic potential of -800 mV(SCE),  and held  for  a period of  5 min to  ensure  a reproducible surface. Polarization plots were  run  at a  scan  rate of  60  mV  min-l and  all potentials quoted are  with  respect to  the  saturated calomel electrode. For  the chemical  pre-treatments the  wire  loops were immersed  in 50% HNO  3  solution, maintained at  a  temperature of  50°C  for 30  min. For  the 20% HNO  3  + 4%  HF solution the  immersion temperature was  65°C  and  the  immersion time  10  min.  Reproducibility of measurements  was good and the  results presented represent the  average  of  at  least three  identical experiments.

## EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Pitting potential (Ep)  values measured  for  steel 316L in  chloride and  bromide solutions using the electrode assembly shown  in  Fig. la  show  the usual variation with pH and  anion  concentration. As observed by  most  workers in  the  field, the  chloride anion  is found  clearly to  be  the  more aggressive anion  under  the  conditions studied (Fig. 2a  and  b). Since  stainless steel type 316L was  not  commercially available, wire loop  tests were  carried out  using steel type 316,  the  chemical composition of  the  two steel samples  being  quite  similar, particularly in  relation to  the  major  alloying elements. Polarization plots recorded using the  wire loop  system  (Fig. lb), in  1.0  M

Fig. 3. Potentiodynamic polarization plots recorded for  316  wire  in  1.0 M  NaC1 and 1.0  M NaBr, pH 3 solutions.

<!-- image -->

NaC1  and 1.0  M  NaBr,  pH 3  solutions are  shown in  Fig. 3.  Rather  surprisingly with this electrode system, the  plots indicate that the  B r -   ion  is now the  more aggressive ion, and by  a  considerable amount.  This  unexpected result does  not  seem to  be  as  a result of  any  particular pH or  anion  concentration as  indicated in  Fig. 4a  and  b.  The order  with respect to film  breakdown is  again  Br- more severe  than CI-,  the variation of the  pitting potentials over  the  range  studied being  of  the  order  of 200  mV.

Initially it was thought  that these  unexpected  results could  be due to  stress or strain introduced as  a  result of  the  loop  size. However, as  indicated in  Table  1,  on increasing the  loop  size to  70 mm,  the  same order  of  pitting potentials was again observed. Smaller loop  sizes did  lead to  some changes  in  the  breakdown  potentials in C1- solutions (Table  1), so  that the  25  mm  loop  diameter would seem the  optimum size.

The only  other steel wires  commercially available were those  of  type  304L and 302,  and  tests were  also conducted  with  these materials. Again with  these steels the test results showed Br- to  be the  more aggressive in  terms  of  oxide  stability. The variation of  Ep  with  pH for steel 302  in  1  M  NaC1 and  1  M  NaBr is shown in  Fig. 5,  the difference between  the  pitting potential values in  this instance being  of  the  order of 100  mV.

Pitting potentials measured  for steel 316  in  solutions containing both  C1-  and  Brions  (total halide --  1.0  M) are  shown in  Fig. 6.  Ep  values for this steel in  CI-  or  B r solutions only  in  the  range  0.01-1.0 M  are  also  included in  this plot. For  the  mixed halide solutions of  pH 5.5  it is clear that addition of  just small  amounts  of  Br-  ions is sufficient to  lower  the  Ep values of  the  CI-  solutions very  considerably. For  halide concentrations greater than  0.5  M  the  breakdown potentials would seem to be determined solely by  the  B r -   ions. Shown in  Fig. 7a  is a  current-time plot recorded initially at400 mV  in  a 1.0  M  NaCI solution. After  a  20  min passivation period  the NaC1 solution is  replaced by 1.0  M  NaBr using a  special overflow cell. 15  Addition of the  Br-  ions  leads  almost  immediately to  activation of  the  steel sample.  This  is  as

Fig. 4. (a)  The variation of  Ep with  logarithmic halide concentration for 316  wire, pH 5.5. (b)  The variation of  Ep with  pH for 316  wire  in  0.5  M  CI-  and  0.5  M  B r -   solutions.

<!-- image -->

Table  1.  Influence of  loop  size on  magnitude  of  pitting potentials in  C1 solutions of  pH 3

|   CI- (tool dm -3) |   Loop size (mm) |   Ep (mV(SCE)) |
|--------------------|------------------|----------------|
|                  1 |               25 |            530 |
|                  1 |               70 |            530 |
|                  1 |               22 |            517 |
|                  1 |               17 |            485 |

would be expected,  since  the chosen passivation potential exceeds  the pitting potential for the  steel in  the  given  Br-  solution. This  would  tend to  indicate that the potentiodynamically determined pitting potential value  is indeed  the  correct one. Replacement  of  Br-  by  Cl-  in  the  same cell at  a  potential of  300  mV  did  not  lead to activation (Fig. 7b).  Addition of  the  sulphate anion  to  chloride or  bromide  solutions

I

6

Fig.  5. The variation of  pitting potential with  pH for  302 wire  in  1.0  M  NaC! and 1.0  M NaBr.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. The variation of  Ep with  anion  concentration for  316  wire  in  solutions of  (IS]) NaC1, (Ill) NaBr and (A) mixtures of  NaCl and  NaBr, pH 5.5.

<!-- image -->

generally leads to  an  ennoblement of  the  pitting potential values for stainless steels. 16 This  trend is  clearly evident for  steel 316 in  the  various Cl-  + SO4 and Br- + SO4 combinations (up  to  1.0  M  in  total) shown in  Fig.  8.  Notwithstanding this trend, however,  the  more aggressive nature of  the Br-  anion  is again evident over  the  whole concentration range  but  most  particularly inthe  0.5-1.0 M  range.

Surface  treatments of  some stainless steels in  solutions such  as  50%  HNO3 or 20%  HNO3 + 4%  HF  have  been  shown  17'18 to  decrease their pitting susceptibility very  considerably in  halide solutions. As indicated in  Table  2,  this is indeed  the  case

90

Fig. 7.  (a) Current decay  profile recorded at  a  potential of  400  mV(SCE), initially in  a  1.0 M  NaCI,  pH 2.5  solution. NaBr added  after a  20  min  passivation period. (b)  Current decay profile recorded at  a  potential of  300  mV(SCE)  in  a 1.0  M  NaBr,  pH 2.5  solution; 1.0  M NaC1 added  after a  20  min  passivation period.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8. The variation of  Ep  for 316  wire in  solutions containing both  CI-  and  SO  2-  and  Brand  SO~- anions.

<!-- image -->

for  the  316  wire  loop  samples in  both  the  CI-  and  Br-  solutions. Even after these pre-treatments the  order with  respect to  oxide  stability is again maintained.

It should be  noted however  that the  ennoblement of  the  pitting potential for the Br-  solutions is considerably less than  for the  C1-  solutions.

Table  2.  Pitting potentials for chemically pre-treated samples of  steel 316  in the  pH 3  halide solutions indicated

| Halide concentration   | Pre-treatment     |   Ep (mV(SCE)) |
|------------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| 1.0M NaCI              | --                |            530 |
| 1.0M NaC1              | 20% HNO 3 + 4% HF |            540 |
| 1.0M NaCI              | 50% HNO 3         |            670 |
| 1.0M NaBr              | --                |            330 |
| 1.0M NaBr              | 20% HNO3 + 4% HF  |            350 |
| 1.0M NaBr              | 50% HNO3          |            385 |

I

10

Fig. 9. The  variation of  Ep  with pH for wire  samples of  Fe, Ni,  Mo and  Ni80Cr20,  in  1.0 M NaCI and  1.0  M  NaBr solutions.

<!-- image -->

## DISCUSSION

As indicated in  the  introduction, the  object of  this work was to  evaluate the performance  of  the  crevice-free electrode assembly  in  order  to  carry out  routine corrosion tests in  various halide solutions. The present wire  loop  electrode system works very  well  in  this context, giving good reproducible results for  repeated tests over  a  wide  range  of  experimental conditions. Within  these  sets of  test results, the one  factor which  perhaps might  mitigate against the  system, and  indeed the  one  most difficult toexplain is the  order of  aggressiveness in  the CI-  and  Br-  solutions. Results with  this order  of  aggressiveness are  not  indeed  unique, 19'2° with  electrode systems of  other conformations. Ep values determined for stainless steels UNS  N08904 (20% Cr,  25%  Ni,  4.5% Mo) and  UNS  $31254  (20% Cr,  18%  Ni,  6.1% Mo) in  0.6  M  NaCI and  NaBr at 70°C  gave  similar results.21 Since Ep values recorded for a  different steel UNS  $31600 (17.2% Cr,  10.5% Ni,  2.0% Mo) under  the  same test conditions gave the  usual order  of  breakdown  i.e. C1- more aggressive than  Br-,  the  authors of  the work attributed the  variation in  results to  the  Mo content of  the  steels. Because  these steels also differ quite substantially in  their Cr  and  Ni  contents it is difficult to  ascribe

42

Fig.  10. (a)  Potentiostatic current time  profile recorded  for  316 wire  in  a 1.0  M  NaCI, pH 2.5  solution at  a  p o t e n t i a l of  400  m V ( S C E ) .   (b)  Potentiostatic current time  profile recorded for  316 wire  in  a 1.0  M  NaBr, pH  2.5  solution at  a  p o t e n t i a l of  300 mV(SCE).

<!-- image -->

the  results  olely to  the  Mo content. Furthermore, since for the  present work the  316 wire  contains just over  2.0% Mo  and  steels 304L and  302  do  not  contain any  Mo  at  all, other factors must be  responsible for  the  anomalous  behaviour.

The surface state of  the  steel wire  does  not  seem to  be  a  major  variable (the wire was used  in  the  as-received state) since  repeated pitting potential determinations show very good  reproducibility. While  surface pre-treatments in  acid solutions Table 2,  do  lead  to  a  considerable nnoblement  of  the  Ep values, the  order with  respect to oxide  attack by  C1- and  Br-  is  still maintained. It should  be  noted  however  that the increase in  the  Ep values for  the  B r -   containing solutions is  considerably less than those  observed for  the  solutions containing C1-.  Surface treatments of  this kind  are considered 11'18 to  remove  sites on the  steel surface (sulphides and  other inclusions), which  might  otherwise lead  to  defects in  the  developing surface oxide. These  defect sites are  believed to  be 22  the  areas where  pit initiation takes place in  halide solutions, probably as  a  result of  the  higher field strengths associated with  such  flaws. Addition of  inhibitors to  solutions containing halide ions, can  result in  preferential adsorption of  inhibitor ions  at  these  flaws ]3  thus  preventing attack  by halide. However, as indicated in  Fig. 8,  while  the  presence of  the  SO] ion  does  lead  to  a  considerable increase in  the  Ep value  for  the  316 steel wire  the  order  of  oxide  stability is  still maintained. It is  also  clear from  the  data in  Fig. 6,  that in  solutions containing both C1- and Br- ions,  small  amounts of  Br- only  are  required to bring  the  pitting potential down to  values close to  those  measured  in  solutions containing Br- only.

Attack  by the  Br-  ion  at  the  oxide  surface would seem therefore to  be relatively independent of  the  CI-  presence or  concentration.

It  has  been  postulated 23  that the  potential of  zero  charge  (Epzc) of  the  surface oxide  in  halide solutions, can  in  many instances be  related to  the  specific potential at which  pitting attack on the  oxide  commences. For  this work it is very  difficult to  see why the  order of  the  Epzc  values should  reverse for the  wire  sample  relative to  those cut  from  bar  or  sheet.

In  a  further attempt to  rationalize the  order of  aggressivity the  alloy constituents of  the  316 steel specimens  were considered further. Iron, nickel and molybdenum were  commercially available in  wire  form  of  similar thickness to  the  steel and these were  tested in  solutions imilar to  those used  for the  316  electrodes. Results for these metals  are  shown in  Fig. 9,  where  the  potential is  plotted versus pH for  1.0  M  NaCI and 1.0  M  NaBr solutions. Where definite pitting potentials were  not  evident on  the polarization plots, the  potential corresponding to  an  anodic  current of  10/~A cm -2 was used  in  the  plots. These  data  show the  usual  trends for  these metals  in  halide solutions of  varying  pH.  13  For Fe,  Ni and Mo  the  CI- is  found  to  be the  more aggressive anion although  not by a very  substantial margin. Pitting potentials measured for  a fiat sample of  Cr metal  in  1.0  M  NaCl  and 1.0  M  NaBr, pH  2.5 solutions were  856  and  866  mV, respectively, again the  usual trend. Included in  Fig. 9 also  are  some  results for  an 80%  Ni:20%  Cr wire sample.  Here the  order  of aggressiveness is  found to  be similar to that  for  the  316 steel sample,  but  by a considerably reduced  amount. While the  Ep values  for  this wire  sample are  very much higher than  those  for pure  Ni  it would seem fair to  say  that it is not  the  overall composition of  the  steel alloy which  determines this order  of  oxide  stability. Other factors must be  considered.

It  has  been  shown  24  that the  ability of  halide ions  to  adsorb  on metal  or  oxide surfaces normally increases in  the  order F- &lt; C1- &lt; Br-  &lt; I-  which  is also the  order of  increasing ionic radius. For  I and  F -   solutions the  verification ofthis sequence  of aggressiveness for  stainless  teels is  difficult, due to  the  occurrence of  secondary processes. 12  For  B r -   and  C1-  solutions, it is fair to  say, that stainless steels, except on quite rare  occasions show the  reverse order  of  pitting tendencies. Pitting studies on Ti  metal  and  some of  its alloys 25  and  also on Ta metal, 26  have  yielded results which agree  with  the  above  order of  adsorption ability.

The exact meaning  of, or  the  precise factors which  govern  the  pitting tendency of stainless steels in  these  halide solutions would thus  seem difficult to  rationalize.

From the  results so  far  presented two interesting points emerge  which  might, in part  at  least, give  some further insights into the  observed order  or  pitting susceptibility. These  are: (i) Ep  values determined for the  wire  loop  electrode in  the  bromide solutions studied  are  reasonably similar to  Ep values  obtained for  316L and 304 electrodes 12'13  cut from steel  bar. In chloride  solutions, however, Ep  values measured  using the  wire  loop  system  are  considerably higher than  those obtained for 316L and 304 samples  cut  from  steel bar  and  indeed for  316  sheet  metal 27  samples; (ii) as  indicated in  Table  2,  the  improvement  in  the  pitting potential, observed after the  various surface treatments shown,  is considerably less pronounced  for tests in  the Br-  solutions, than  those observed for C1- ones. It would  seem  reasonable to  assume on  the  basis of  these two  observations that the  anomalous  behaviour observed in  this instance is  associated with  attack on the  oxide  surface by  the  CI-  ion.

In a recent  paper,  Burstein  and Pistorius 28 reported  a pitting potential of

550  mV(SCE)  for a  type  304  steel, immersed  in  solution (1.0 M  NaCl,  pH 0.7) in  the form  of  50/~m wire  electrodes.

Indeed  for some 25%  of  these wire  electrodes, breakdown did  not  occur  until at least 850 mV.  These values  are  considerably higher  than  those  obtained with  304 steel samples  cut  from sheet  or bar  in  similar chloride solutions. These authors suggest that the  very  high  Ep values obtained with  the  50/~m electrodes may be  as  a result of the strong  refining effect of the wire-drawing  process  on  malleable inclusions (such  as  sulphides) or  other pit  nucleation sites. All  this could  perhaps suggest that the  Cl-  ion  has  a  much greater tendency to  adsorb  at  surface inclusions such  as  sulphides than  the  B r -   ion. Thus the  greater the  population of  these surface defects, the  easier it is for pit initiation tooccur. The lower  the  population density, as is the  case  for the  wire  loop  samples, the  more difficult i is for  attack to  initiate, and so  the  real  adsorption ability of  the  C1- and Br- ions  comes into play.  This  may indeed  explain the  wide  variation in  pitting potential values  measured  by different workers  for the  same steel type  in  given  halide solutions. Perhaps  on  a  surface free of inclusions or  other  defects the  order  of  film  breakdown would reflect  hat of  the adsorption tendencies very  closely. This ability of CI to adsorb  at  flaws,  and generate conditions leading to  metastable pit  formation, is  very  evident from the potentiostatic current-time plots shown in  Fig.  10a and b.  In Fig.  10a the  decay profile is for the  wire  loop in  a  1.0 M  NaCI,  pH 2.5  solution, recorded at  a  potential of 400 mV(SCE),  while  in  Fig.  10b  the  decay  profile is for  the  316  wire  loop in  a  1.0  M NaBr,  pH 2.5  solution, the  potential in  this case  being 300  mV(SCE). Thus  while  the wire  loop  samples  may have  a  reduced  population density of  surface flaws, it is clear that in  the  CI  solution the  greatest number of  pit initiation events take  place. This  is even more striking, since  the  potential chosen for  the  measurement in  the  C1 solution is  more than  120 mV  removed from the  potentiodynamically determined pitting potential while  for  the  Br solution the  potential chosen  is  only  approximately  25 mV  from the  pitting potential. Why  attack by the  Br- ion  on the  oxide covered  metal, seems  less dependent  on  the  presence of  surface inclusions or  flaws is not  immediately obvious  and  is the  subject of  further study.

## REFERENCES

1. Z.  Szklarska-Smialowska, Pitting Corrosion  of Metals, NACE,  Houston,  Texas  (1986).
2. J.  R.  Galvele, Passivity of  Metals, Electrochemical Society, Pennington, New  Jersey, 285 (1978).
3. M. Janik-Czachor, G. C.  Wood  and  G. E.  Thompson, Br.  Corros.  J. 15,154  (1980).
4. T.  Okada, J.  electrochem Soc. 131,  1026  (1984).
5. H. Bohni, Mater.  Sci. Forum 111-112, 401 (1992).
6. J.  Horvath  and  H. H. Uhlig, J.  electrochem. Soc. 115,  791 (1968).
7. O. L.  Riggs, Corrosion 19,  180  (1962).
8. W. M. Carroll, M. B.  Howley and  T.  G. Walsh, Proc.  9th  European Congr.  on Corrosion, Utrecht, Netherlands (1989).
9. P.  Eskelinen, O. Forsen, H. Hanninen,  J.  Onnela  and  S.  Ylasaari, Mater.  Sci. Forum 111-112,515 (1992).
10. N. G. Thompson and  B.  C.  Syrett, Corrosion 48,649  (1992).
11. W. M. Carroll and  T.  G. Walsh, Corros.  Sci. 29,  1205  (1989).
12. W. M. Carroll and  M. B.  Howley, Corros.  Sci. 30,  643 (1990).
13. M. B.  Howley, Ph.D.  Thesis, National University of  Ireland (1989).
14. L.  Stockert, F.  Hunkeler  and  H. Bohni, Corrosion 41,676  (1985).
15.  W. M. Carroll and  C.  B.  Breslin, Corros.  Sci. 33,  1161  (1991).
16. I. L.  Rozenfeld and  1.  S.  Danilov, Corros.  Sci. 7,  129  (1967).

17.  T.  Sydberger, Werkst. Korros. 32,119  (1981).
18. G. Hultquist and  C.  L.  Leygraf, Corrosion 36,  126  (1980).
19.  A. Marchlewska  and  Z.  Szklarska-Smialowska, Proc.  8th  Cong. Met.  Corros. Mainz (i981).
20. G. Herbsleb, H. Hildebrand and  W. Schwenk, Werkst. Korros. 27,  618  (1976).
21. R. Guo and  M. B.  Ives, Corrosion  46, 125  (1990).
22. R.  Morach and  H. Bohni, Mater.  Sci. Forum 111-112,493  (1992).
23. P.  M. Natishan, E.  McCafferty and  G. K. Hubler, J.  electrochem. Soc. 133,  1061  (1986).
24. H. J.  Raetzer-Scheibe and  H. G.  Teller, Corros.  Sci. 13,  11  (1973).
25. H. J.  Raetzer-Scheibe, Corrosion  34,437 (1978).
26. M. F.  Abd. Rabboh and  P.  J.  Boden, Localized Corrosion, NACE-3,  Houston,  Texas, 653 (1974).
27. J.  H~ Wang, C.  C.  Su and  Z.  Szklarska-Smialowska, Corrosion  44, 732  (1988).
28. P.  C.  Pistorius and  G.  T.  Burstein, Phil. Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lond. A,  531 (1992).